Documents are usually written such that they address different topics one after the other in an organized manner. They are normally broken up explicitly or implicitly into sections. This organization applies even to summaries of documents. It is intuitive to think that summaries should address different "themes" appearing in the documents. Some summarizers incorporate this aspect through clustering. If the document collection for which summary is being produced is of totally different topics, document clustering becomes almost essential to generate a meaningful summary. Documents are represented using term frequencyinverse document frequency (TF-IDF) BIB641047 of scores of words. Term frequency used in this context is the average number of occurrences (per document) over the cluster. IDF value is computed based on the entire corpus. The summarizer takes already clustered documents as input. Each cluster is considered a theme. The theme is represented by words with top ranking term frequency, inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) scores in that cluster. Sentence selection is based on similarity of the sentences to the theme of the cluster C i .The next factor that is considered for sentence selection is the location of the sentence in the document (L i ). In the context of newswire articles, the closer to the beginning a sentence appears, the higher its weight age for inclusion in summary. The last factor that increases the score of a sentence is its similarity to the first sentence in the document to which it belongs (F i ). The overall score (Si) of a sentence i is a weighted sum of the above three factors: where S i is the score of sentence C i,, F i are the scores of the sentence i based on the similarity to theme of cluster and first sentence of the document it belongs to, respectively. L i is the score of the sentence based on its location in the document. w 1, w 2 andw 3 are the weights for linear combination of the three scores. Note the similarity between the sentence score in equations (1) and BIB10238698 . The role of F in (2) is similar to that of T in (1). The difference however, is that S i, in (2) is further re-scored using a redundancy factor. Once the documents are clustered, sentence selection from within the cluster to form its summary is local to the documents in the cluster. The IDF value based on the corpus statistics seems counter-intuitive. A better choice may be to take the Average-TF alone to determine the theme of the cluster, and then rely on the "anti redundancy" factor to cover the important 'themes' within the cluster.