Interest in automatic text summarization, arose as early as the fifties. An important paper of these days is the one in 1958, suggested to weight the sentences of a document as a function of high frequency words BIB15475171 , disregarding the very high frequency common words. Automatic text summarization system BIB1177942 in 1969, which, in addition to the standard keyword method (i.e., frequency depending weights), also used the following three methods for determining the sentence weights: 1. Cue Method: This is based on the hypothesis that the relevance of a sentence is computed by the presence or absence of certain cue words in the cue dictionary. 2. Title Method: Here, the sentence weight is computed as a sum of all the content words appearing in the title and (sub-) headings of a text. 3. Location Method: This method is based on the assumption that sentences occurring in initial position of both text and individual paragraphs have a higher probability of being relevant. The results showed, that the best correlation between the automatic and human-made extracts was achieved using a combination of these three latter methods. The Trainable Document Summarizer BIB5775833 in 1995 performs sentence extracting task, based on a number of weighting heuristics. Following features were used and evaluated: 1. Sentence Length Cut-O Feature: sentences containing less than a pre-specified number of words are not included in the abstract 2. Fixed-Phrase Feature: sentences containing certain cue words and phrases are included 3. Paragraph Feature: this is basically equivalent to Location Method feature in BIB1177942 4. Thematic Word Feature: the most frequent words are defined as thematic words. Sentence scores are functions of the thematic words' frequencies 5. Uppercase Word Feature: upper-case words (with certain obvious exceptions) are treated as thematic words, as well. A Corpus was used in this method, which contained 188 document/summary pairs from 21 publications in a scientific/technical domain. The summaries were produced by professional experts and the sentences occurring in the summaries were aligned to the original document texts, indicating also the degree of similarity as mentioned earlier, the vast majority (about 80%) of the summary sentences could be classified as direct sentence matches. The ANES text extraction system  in 1995 is a system that performs automatic, domain-independent condensation of news data. The process of summary generation has four major constituents: 1. Corpus analysis: this is mainly a calculation of the tf*idf -weights for all terms 2. Statistical selection of signature words: terms with a high tf*idf-weight plus headline-words 3. Sentence weighting: summing over all signature word weights, modifying the weights by some other factors, such as relative location 4. Sentence selection: Selecting high scored sentences. Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) BIB13955350 : As prove to be a mathematically sound frame-work for document retrieval. If one approaches the task of text abstracting from such a probabilistic modeling perspective, it might well be possible that HMMs could be employed for this purpose, as well. Clustering: Building links  and/or clusters between index terms, phrases and/or other subparts of the documents has been employed by standard information retrieval. Although this is not an issue in any of the above mentioned abstracting systems, it seems to be worth of consideration when building such systems.