Text summarization  has become an important and timely tool for assisting and interpreting text information in today's fast-growing information age. It is very difficult for human beings to manually summarize large documents of text. There is an abundance of text material available on the internet. However, usually the Internet provides more information than is needed. Therefore, a twofold problem is encountered: searching for relevant documents through an overwhelming number of documents available, and absorbing a large quantity of relevant information. The goal of automatic text summarization is condensing the source text into a shorter version preserving its information content and overall meaning. A summary  can be employed in an indicative way as a pointer to some parts of the original document, or in an informative way to cover all relevant information of the text. In both cases the most important advantage of using a summary is its reduced reading time. A good summary system should reflect the diverse topics of the document while keeping redundancy to a minimum. Summarization tools may also search for headings and other markers of subtopics in order to identify the key points of a document. Microsoft Word's AutoSummarize function is a simple example of text summarization. Text Summarization methods can be classified into extractive and abstractive summarization. An extractive summarization method consists of selecting important sentences, paragraphs etc. from the original document and concatenating them into shorter form. The importance of sentences is decided based on statistical and linguistic features of sentences. An Abstractive summarization BIB2962090 [33] attempts to develop an understanding of the main concepts in a document and then express those concepts in clear natural language. It uses linguistic methods to examine and interpret the text and then to find the new concepts and expressions to best describe it by generating a new shorter text that conveys the most important information from the original text document. This paper focuses on extractive text summarization methods. Extractive summaries BIB10238698 are formulated by extracting key text segments (sentences or passages) from the text, based on statistical analysis of individual or mixed surface level features such as word/phrase frequency, location or cue words to locate the sentences to be extracted. The "most important" content is treated as the "most frequent" or the "most favorably positioned" content. Such an approach thus avoids any efforts on deep text understanding. They are conceptually simple, easy to implement. Extractive text summarization process  can be divided into two steps: 1) Pre Processing step and 2) Processing step. Pre Processing is structured representation of the original text. It usually includes: a) Sentences boundary identification. In English, sentence boundary is identified with presence of dot at the end of sentence. b) Stop-Word Elimination-Common words with no semantics and which do not aggregate relevant information to the task are eliminated. c) Stemming-The purpose of stemming is to obtain the stem or radix of each word, which emphasize its semantics. In Processing step, features influencing the relevance of sentences are decided and calculated and then weights are assigned to these features using weight learning method. Final score of each sentence is determined using Feature-weight equation. Top ranked sentences are selected for final summary. Problems with the extractive summary  [47] are: 1. Extracted sentences usually tend to be longer than average. Due to this, parts of the segments that are not essential for summary also get included, consuming space. 2. Important or relevant information is usually spread across sentences, and extractive summaries cannot capture this (unless the summary is long enough to hold all those sentences). 3. Conflicting information may not be presented accurately.  . Pure extraction often leads to problems in overall coherence of the summary-a frequent issue concerns "dangling" anaphora. Sentences often contain pronouns, which lose their referents when extracted out of context. Worse yet, stitching together decontextualized extracts may lead to a misleading interpretation of anaphors (resulting in an inaccurate representation of source information, i.e., low fidelity). Similar issues exist with temporal expressions. These problems become more severe in the multi-document case, since extracts are drawn from different sources. A general approach to addressing these issues involves post-processing extracts, for example, replacing pronouns with their antecedents, replacing relative temporal expression with actual dates, etc. Problems with the abstractive summary  are: The biggest challenge for abstractive summary is the representation problem. Systems' capabilities are constrained by the richness of their representations and their ability to generate such structures-systems cannot summarize what their representations cannot capture. In limited domains, it may be feasible to devise appropriate structures, but a general-purpose solution depends on open-domain semantic analysis. Systems that can truly "understand" natural language are beyond the capabilities of today's technology. Summary evaluation  [36] BIB3050993 is a very important aspect for text summarization. Generally, summaries can be evaluated using intrinsic or extrinsic measures. While intrinsic methods attempt to measure summary quality using human evaluation and extrinsic methods measure the same through a task-based  performance measure such the information retrieval-oriented task. Newsblaster is a good example of a text summarizer, that helps users find the news that is of the most interest to them. The system automatically collects, clusters, categorizes, and summarizes news from several sites on the web (CNN, Reuters, Fox News, etc.) on a daily basis, and it provides users a user-friendly interface to browse the results.