Multilingual text summarization is to summarize the source text in different language to the target language final summary. SimFinderML  identifies similar pieces of text by computing similarity over multiple features. There are two types of features, composite features, and unary features. All features are computed over primitives, syntactic, linguistic, or knowledge-based information units extracted from the sentences. Both composite and unary features are constructed over the primitives. The primitives used and features computed can be set at run-time, allowing for easy experimentation with different settings, and making it easy to add new features and primitives. Support for new languages is added to the system by developing modules conforming to interfaces for text pre-processing and primitive extraction for the language, and using existing dictionary-based translation methods, or adding other language-specific translation methods. MINDS  integrates multi-lingual summarization and multi document summarization capabilities using a multiengine, core summarization system and provides fast, interactive document access through hypertext summaries. Core summarization problem of MINDS is taking a single text and producing a shorter text in the same language that contains all the main points in the input text. It is using a robust, graded approach for building the core engine by incorporating statistical, syntactic and documents structure analyses among other techniques. This approach is less expensive and more robust than a summarization technique based entirely on a single method. The core engine is being designed in such a way that as additional resources, such as lexical and other knowledge bases or text processing and MT engines, become available from other ongoing research efforts they can be incorporated into the overall multiengine MINDS system. Ideally the core engine itself will remain language independent. A prototype core engine has been built for English, Spanish, Russian, and Japanese documents. MEAD BIB10151424 is the multi-lingual summarization and evaluation method. MEAD's architecture consists of four stages. First, documents in a cluster are converted to MEAD's internal (XML-based) format. Second, given a configuration file or command-line options, a number of features are extracted for each sentence of the cluster. Third, these features are combined into a composite score for each sentence. Fourth, these scores can be further refined after considering possible cross-sentence dependencies (e.g., repeated sentences, chronological ordering, source preferences, etc.) In addition to a number of command-line utilities, MEAD provides a Perl API which lets external programs access its internal libraries. V. CONCLUSIONS This survey paper is concentrating on extractive summarization methods. An extractive summary is selection of important sentences from the original text. The importance of sentences is decided based on statistical and linguistic features of sentences. Many variations of the extractive approach  have been tried in the last ten years. However, it is hard to say how much greater interpretive sophistication, at sentence or text level, contributes to performance. Without the use of NLP, the generated summary may suffer from lack of cohesion and semantics. If texts containing multiple topics, the generated summary might not be balanced. Deciding proper weights of individual features is very important as quality of final summary is depending on it. We should devote more time in deciding feature weights. The biggest challenge for text summarization is to summarize content from a number of textual and semi structured sources, including databases and web pages, in the right way (language, format, size, time) for a specific user. The text summarization software should produce the effective summary in less time and with least redundancy. Summaries can be evaluated using intrinsic or extrinsic measures. While intrinsic methods attempt to measure summary quality using human evaluation and extrinsic methods measure the same through a task based performance measure  such the information retrievaloriented task. Engineering from University College of Engineering, Punjabi University Patiala, under the supervision of Dr. Gurpreet Singh Lehal. He is state merit holder in 10 th and 12 th classes of Punjab School education board. He is devoting his research work in field of Natural Language Processing. He has developed a number of research projects in field of NLP including synonyms detection, automatic question answering and text summarization etc. One of his research paper on Punjabi language text processing was awarded as best research paper by Dr. V. Raja Raman at an International Conference.