Multi document extractive summarization deals with extraction of summarized information from multiple texts written about the same topic. Resulting summary report allows individual users, so as professional information consumers, to quickly familiarize themselves with information contained in a large cluster of documents. Multi-document summarization creates information reports that are both concise and comprehensive. With different opinions being put together & outlined, every topic is described from multiple perspectives within a single document. NeATS  is a multi-document summarization system that attempts to extract relevant or interesting portions from a set of documents about some topic and present them in coherent order. It is an extraction-based multidocument summarization system. Given an input of a collection of sets of newspaper articles, NeATS generates summaries in three stages: content selection, filtering, and presentation. The goal of content selection is to identify important concepts mentioned in a document collection. In a key step for locating important sentences, NeATS computes the likelihood ratio to identify key concepts in unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams, using the on-topic document collection as the relevant set and the off-topic document collection as the irrelevant set. With the individual key concepts available, these concepts are clustered in order to identify major subtopics within the main topic. Clusters are formed through strict lexical connection. Each sentence in the document set is then ranked, using the key concept structures. NeATS uses three different filters: sentence position, stigma words, and maximum marginal relevancy. Sentence position is a good content filter, that only retains the leading 10 sentences. Some sentences start with stigma words like: • Conjunctions (e.g., but, although, however) • The verb say and its derivatives • Quotation marks • Pronouns such as he, she, and they usually cause discontinuity in summaries. The scores of these sentences are reduced to avoid including them in short summaries. Redundancy issue is addressed in maximum marginal relevancy filter. A sentence is added to the summary if and only if its content has less than X percent overlap with the summary. The overlap ratio is computed using simple stemmed word overlap and the threshold X is set empirically. Hub/Authority BIB18376399 framework is multi document summarization system which, firstly detect the sub-topics in multi-documents by sentence clustering and extract the feature words (or phrase) of different sub-topics. Secondly, all feature words and the cue phrases are used as the vertex of Hub and all sentences are regarded as the vertex of Authority. If the sentence contains the words in Hub, there is an edge between the Hub word and the Authority sentence. The initial weight of each vertex considers both the content and the cues such as cue phrase and first sentence. Through the mutual reinforcement mechanism of the Hub-Authority algorithm, we can rank the importance of the sentences within the multi-documents. The assumption behind this cue-based Hub/Authority approach is that a good Hub word (or phrase) is the content that points to many good authorities sentences and a good authority sentence is a vertex that is pointed to by many good hub words. Thirdly, It has used the Markov Model to order the subtopics that the final summarization should contain and output the text summarization according to the sentence ranking score of all sentences within one sub-topic as user' requirement. Generic relation extraction (GRE)  is a novel multi document text summarization approach, which aims to build systems for relation identification and characterization that can be transferred across domains and tasks without modification of model parameters.