In query based text summarization  system, the sentences in a given document are scored based on the frequency counts of terms (words or phrases). The sentences containing the query phrases are given higher scores than the ones containing single query words. Then, the sentences with highest scores are incorporated into the output summary together with their structural context. Portions of text may be extracted from different sections or subsections. The resulting summary is the union of such extracts. The number of extracted sentences and the extent to which their context is displayed depends on the summary frame size which is fixed to the size of the screen that can be seen without scrolling. In the sentence extraction algorithm, whenever a sentence is selected for the inclusion in the summary, some of the headings in that context are also selected. The query based sentence extraction algorithm is as follows: Algorithm: 1: Rank all the sentences according to their score. 2: Add the main title of the document to the summary. 3: Add the first level-1 heading to the summary. 4: While (summary size limit not exceeded) 5: Add the next highest scored sentence. 6: Add the structural context of the sentence: (if any and not already included in the summary) 7: Add the highest level heading above the extracted text (call this heading h). 8: Add the heading before h in the same level. 9: Add the heading after h in the same level. 10: Repeat steps 7, 8 and 9 for the next highest level headings.