As seen in the previous methods, the first step involved in the process of summarizing one or more documents is identifying the issues or topics addressed in the document. Graph theoretic representation BIB3506525 of passages provides a method of identification of these themes. After the common preprocessing steps, namely, stop word removal and stemming, sentences in the documents are represented as nodes in an undirected graph. There is a node for every sentence. Two sentences are connected with an edge if the two sentences share some common words, or in other words, their (cosine, or such) similarity is above some threshold. This representation yields two results: The partitions contained in the graph (that is those sub-graphs that are unconnected to the other sub graphs), form distinct topics covered in the documents. This allows a choice of coverage in the summary. For query-specific summaries, sentences may be selected only from the pertinent sub graph, while for generic summaries, representative sentences may be chosen from each of the sub-graphs. The second result yielded by the graph-theoretic method is the identification of the important sentences in the document. The nodes with high cardinality (number of edges connected to that node), are the important sentences in the partition, and hence carry higher preference to be included in the summary. Figure2 shows an example graph for a document. It can be seen that there are about 3-4 topics in the document; the nodes that are encircled can be seen to be informative sentences in the document, since they share information with many other sentences in the document. The graph theoretic method may also be adapted easily for visualization of inter-and intra-document similarity.