This method considers each characteristic of a text such as sentence length, similarity to little, similarity to key word and etc. as the input of fuzzy system[2] BIB2971834 . Then, it enters all the rules needed for summarization, in the knowledge base of system. After ward, a value from zero to one is obtained for each sentence in the output based on sentence characteristics and the available rules in the knowledge base. The obtained value in the output determines the degree of the importance of the sentence in the final summary. The input membership function for each feature is divided into three membership functions which are composed of insignificant values (low L), very low (VL), medium (M), significant values (High h) and very high (VH). The important sentences are extracted using IF-THEN rules according to the feature criteria. Text summarization based on fuzzy logic system architecture  is shown in figure6. Fuzzy logic system design usually implicates selecting fuzzy rules and membership function. The selection of fuzzy rules and membership functions directly affect the performance of the fuzzy logic system. The fuzzy logic system consists of four components: fuzzifier, inference engine, defuzzifier, and the fuzzy knowledge base. In the fuzzifier, crisp inputs are translated into linguistic values using a membership function to be used to the input linguistic variables. After fuzzification, the inference engine refers to the rule base containing fuzzy IFTHEN rules to derive the linguistic values. In the last step, the output linguistic variables from the inference are converted to the final crisp values by the defuzzifier using membership function for representing the final sentence score.