Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)  is a very powerful mathematical tool that can find principal orthogonal dimensions of multidimensional data. It has applications in many areas and is known by different names: Karhunen-Loeve Transform in image processing, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) in signal processes and Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) in text processing. It gets this name LSA because SVD applied to documentword matrices, groups documents that are semantically related to each other, even when they do not share common words. Words that usually occur in related contexts are also related in the same singular space. This method can be applied to extract the topic-words and content-sentences from documents. The advantage of using LSA vectors for summarization rather than the word vectors is that conceptual (or semantic) relations as represented in human brain are automatically captured in the LSA, while using word vectors without the LSA transformation requires design of explicit methods to derive conceptual relations. Since SVD finds principal and mutually orthogonal dimensions of the sentence vectors, picking out a representative sentence from each of the dimensions ensures relevance to the document, and orthogonality ensures non-redundancy. It is to be noted that this property applies only to data that has principal dimensions inherently-however, LSA would probably work since most of the text data has such principal dimensions owing to the variety of topics it addresses.