An another query-specific summarization BIB11629513 method views a document as a set of interconnected text fragments (passages) and focuses on keyword queries, since keyword search is the most popular information discovery method on documents, because of its power and ease of use. Firstly, at the preprocessing stage, it adds structure to every document, which can then be viewed as a labeled, weighted graph, called the document graph. Then, at query time, given a set of keywords, it performs keyword proximity search on the document graphs to discover how the keywords are associated in the document graphs. For each document its summary is the minimum spanning tree on the corresponding document graph that contains all the keywords. In query-specific opinion summarization system  (QOS), When input an opinion question, the system returns a summary with relevance to the opinion and target described by the question. The system has several modules to be able to do this: a question analysis and query reformulation module, a latent semantic indexing based sentence scoring module, a sentence polarity detection module, and a redundancy removal module. Bayesian summarization  (BAYESUM) is a model for sentence extraction in query-focused summarization. BAYESUM leverages the common case in which multiple documents are relevant to a single query. Using these documents as reinforcement for query terms, BAYESUM is not afflicted by the paucity of information in short queries. For a collection of D documents and Q queries, assume a D × Q binary matrix r, where r dq = 1 if an only if document d is relevant to query q. In multi document summarization, r dq will be 1 exactly when d is in the document set corresponding to query q.