In the last two decades, the advancements in nonlinear control systems have been in two folds; advances in theoretical approaches and more importantly applicationdriven developments. In theory, major breakthrough has been seen in the areas of sliding control, feedback linearization and nonlinear adaptive strategies. Recently, nonlinear control systems have gained high popularity primarily due to the extensive application of theoretical concepts to solve real world problems in various domains like electrical, mechanical, medical, avionics, space etc. Moreover, the advances in computer hardware and information technology have greatly resolved the computational constraints on analysis and design of nonlinear control systems. Now we see numerous applications of nonlinear control systems ranging from 'drive by wire' cars to 'fly by wire' aircraft flight control systems, to robotic, medical, industrial and space systems. Robotic manipulators have reshaped the industrial automation and are now an integral part of most of the modern plants. Although linear control strategies like PID  have been the main workhorse in industry since decades, however, the trend to employ nonlinear approaches is gradually increasing  . A typical example of implementation of a nonlinear approach i.e. SMC on a customdeveloped pseudo-industrial platform BIB111625791 is presented in BIB16698172 . The control objective was to ensure tracking of desired trajectory (q d ). This was achieved by defining a sliding manifold (S =ė+Ce) based on error signal (e = q d − q). The control law giving required input joint torque (τ) is expressed in (9) while the corresponding blockdigram is illustrated in Fig. 4 . (9) where M (q) denotes the inertia matrix, V (q,q) is the matrix comprising of Centrifugal and Corollis forces and G(q) represents the gravity effect. The matrices K = diag {k 1 k 2 k 3 k 4 } and C = diag {c 1 c 2 c 3 c 4 } are sliding surface constant and switching gain constant respectively. The system dynamics can be altered by varying K and C. A more advanced variant of SMC, Integral Sliding Mode Control (ISMC) eliminates reaching phase and improves performance in terms of position error. It also significantly reduces the chattering phenomena. Based on ISMC law, Khan and Jalani proposed and experimentally validated a scheme for a humanoid robot arm control. They have also demonstrated compliance control via this scheme employing joint torque sensors BIB52840404 . The scheme is illustrated in Fig. 5 . Recently, the book by Speirs et al. BIB114130980 presents bio-inspired nonlinear control for generating human-like posture, mimicking human motion and model reference adaptive compliance approaches. They have addressed the associated actuator saturation issues by introducing anti-windup compensators. In medical domain, recent applications of nonlinear control includes anesthesia administration and control of devices for rehabilitation and prosthetics BIB110842354 BIB120164817 BIB107586108 . A nonlinear control approach to regulate Depth Of hypnosis (DOH) in Propofol anesthesia is reported in BIB21209046 . The pa- BIB52840404 tient's hypnosis level is measured by EEG-based sensors e.g. Bispectral Index (BIS). Based on the derived patient's model, SMC minimizes steady state error to maintain hypnosis level within allowable range so as to conduct surgical procedures. Fig. 6 presents simulation results of eight patients after the infusion of drug for surgery. DOH level of 100 represents awake state while the level of 40-60 refers to moderate hypnotic state and is considered as safe range to execute surgery. As shown in the figure, all the patients achieved the desired level of hypnosis. The last decade has seen the emergence of the systems biology approach to understand biological systems in a holistic manner BIB3474472 . Rather than enumerating individual components (molecules, proteins) the systems biology approach focuses on the interactions between subsystems in order to understand the emergent dynamic behavior of the living system. Both the structural and functional organizations are important for characterizing the so-called symbiotic state of the biological system under study BIB59681544 . The structural organization involves network topologies including gene regulatory networks and biochemical reaction networks, and physical layers including molecules within organelles, organelles within cells, cells within tissues, tissues with organs and so forth. The functional organization involves cell functions including cell growth, cell division, cell differentiation (specialization) and cell death (apoptosis). The essence of systems biology is an understanding of the nonlinear dynamics of the biological system, which in turn requires the developments of computational models. Construction and analysis of such models of different subsystems (modules) of a system allow us to identify feedback loops in the system. Computer simulations could be used to test a drug or therapy before expensive clinical trials. In control-theoretic terms, a disease could be represented by some region of the state space of a living system. Viewed as a control system, the reference or desired state of the system could represent the healthy state. The drug or therapy could be represented by a controller in the loop. An application of nonlinear control can be found in BIB122606172 where the authors apply feedback linearization and optimal control strategies to a nonlinear state-space model of HIV infection. Other applications of optimal control of biological systems can be found in BIB2826807 . The curious reader might wonder why nonlinearity is ubiquitous in biological systems. This question can be answered fully in a brief account like this text but a justification will be provided by a few examples. Under appropriate assumptions, the mass action kinetics and mass action-like kinetics. Mass action-like kinetics are obeyed by intracellular biochemical reactions, cell-cell interactions and inter-species interactions including the epidemiological and predator-prey interactions. The state variables in mass action-like kinetics multiply which gives rise to nonlinear terms in the differential equations BIB3474472 . For instance, the rate of a chemical interaction between two species, commonly written as depends on the probability of encounter (collision) per unit time of the reactant (interacting) species. Computing such a probability involves multiplication of the abundances of the reactant species. Other sources of nonlinearity include the feedback mechanisms in which a product of a reaction cascade could enhance or inhibit the reactants. Simplifications resulting from specific assumptions (e.g. quasi-steady state) including the Michaelis-Menten kinetics and Hill kinetics are in the form of fractions, and hence nonlinear terms in the model. The rich variety of such rateequation models has been outlined in Fig. 7 . In chemical industry, the control of basic variables like pressure, levels, temperatures, flows and some quality variables is usually achieved by PID based law enhanced with advanced structures such as feedforward control, cascade control, ratio control, dead-time compensators etc. Common process characteristics in a chemical industry include BIB96585275 ; unmeasured state variables and disturbances, multivariable interactions between variables, high order and distributed processes, uncertain and timevarying parameters and dead-time on inputs and measure- BIB21209046 ments. Complex problems arising due to constraints, delays, lags and model uncertainty can better be resolved using nonlinear control approaches. Owing to these reasons, Model Predictive Control (MPC), explicitly based on nonlinear dynamic representation of the chemical process, was developed. MPC is based on mathematical optimization and is now de-facto standard in nonlinear control of process industries. Other related concepts include Dynamic Programming (DP) and iterative learning control for batch processes. A new trend BIB109884054 is to realize MPC law based on Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Genetic Algorithm (GA) for trajectory tracking and disturbance rejection. Nonlinear control techniques are gradually replacing their linear counterparts in refineries and petrochemical plants to handle chemicals and polymers BIB101535536 . A detailed review presenting challenges and progress of control systems in chemical industry is reported in  . Most of the power systems involve varying operating conditions and/or uncertainties, some of which may not be anticipated a priori BIB32003610 . Power systems e.g. Flexible AC Transmission Systems (FACTS) demand controllers that have to tuned online, thus making the trivial decentralised control laws inadequate. The major contributions of nonlinear control in power systems is to; regulate frequency and voltage, adequately damp the oscillations and preserve synchronisation in the presence of disturbances. Relevant techniques with eminent recent advances include; Nonlinear PI BIB55766236 , Optimal Control BIB217220 , MPC  , Passivity-based control BIB10169700 , SMC BIB22592746 and Observer-based SMC BIB109875888 . In power electronics, commonly encountered circuits exhibit nonlinear dynamics primarily due to the consequences of cyclic switching BIB112118687 . Existence of chaos, bifurcations and limit cycles in the circuits highlights the governing role of nonlinear control. In this context, MPC and SMC are common in power electronics owing to its ability to handle system constraints, multi-variable case and nonlinearities. Applications of MPC with prominent works in power electronics has been systematically reviewed in BIB26044553 . Scientific literature reports several successful implementations of control laws for applications like Uninterruptible Power Supplies (UPS), Active Front End (AFE), drives for induction machines and power converters connected to RL loads. Noticeable recent advancements include; SMC  and its variants BIB18771987  , Observer-based control BIB108816995 and reinforcement learning based nonlinear control  . Further control approaches based on physical principles e.g. current-limitation capability BIB206487012 and capacitor ampere-second balance BIB10852766 have also been proposed. Other recent applications of nonlinear control systems are reported for vehicle state estimation BIB107247571 and for control of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) BIB118770747 , Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (AUV)  , Nuclear steam generator BIB123514673 , reactor BIB111440936 , building's heating and cooling BIB112055934 , power pricing and management BIB109818373 and so on. Another trend which is gaining popularity since last two decades is to introduce adaptability and optimality in traditional nonlinear control strategies.