is known and satisfies δ(t) ≤ K * where K is a positive constant. To achieve the objective of directing the states to zero even in the presence of disturbances, we define a sliding surface as where C is a row vector of the dimensions same as that of the states vector. The choice of elements of C ensures that s becomes Hurwitz monic polynomial. The control law keeps s = 0, which results in order reduction by evolving the system with n−1 states in sliding mode. This ultimately makes the feedback system insensitive to the matched disturbances. The control law for SMC consists of a nominal feedback control term and an additional part to deal with uncertainties. The overall control law can be written as where u eqv corresponds to the equivalent control input and u disc is a discontinuous control term. The design of u eqv involves posingṡ = 0 along the dynamics of (1) while assuming that Δ (x, t) = 0. Therefore, This control law is capable of ensuring thatṡ = 0. However, the condition s ≠ 0 may occur demonstrating that the sliding mode is not in practice. Thus, u disc is designed so as to mitigate the consequences of disturbances finally maintaining s = 0. This term can be designed based on a Lyapunov function of the form Differentiating w.r.t. time along (1), we geṫ Using norm bounded assumption, (5) reduces tȯ Considering provided that K −|δ (t)| ≥ μ > 0. The inequality in (7) establishes that that sliding mode takes place in finite time even in the presence of uncertainties. Consequently, the closed loop dynamics can be written as . . . . Choice of positive values of the constants c i in (2) ensures that the poles of the feedback system are in Left Half Plane (LHP). As a final comment, x → 0 as t → ∞ and the system in (8) is not influenced by the uncertainties highlighting the invariance feature of SMC. An ideal SMC may require infinitely fast switching in an attempt to accurately track the reference trajectory. However, practical switched controllers have imperfections limiting the switching frequency. Thus the representative point may oscillate around the selected sliding surface leading to an undesirable phenomenon termed as chattering. Figure 3 illustrates this concept. Solutions to this problem are discussed in BIB10135647 .