As an educational example, an inverted pendulum mounted on a moving cart is presented in this section. Fig. 11 depicts a cart of (effective) mass M pivotted with an inverted pendulum of mass m and (massless) rod length l. The system is driven by a horizontal force u applied at the cart. The two outputs include the (horizontal) cart displacement x and the pendulum angle φ. Assume viscous friction of coefficient b. Application of basic Newtonian methods, or the more advanced energy methods based on Lagrangian, leads to following pair of nonlinear ordinary  The nonlinearity arises from the trigonometric functions, products, and squares of the outputs. It is often useful to rewrite such equations into a set of first-order differential equations that is referred as state-space form: where z is a vector of state variables and f is a vector of functions. For the system at hand, once chouce of state variables could be which will require f 1 =φ and f 3 =ẋ. The other two functions f 2 and f 4 could be worked out algebraically. The nonlinear state-space model can be linearized around a suitable equilibrium, say the origin of the 4-dimensional state space. The resulting linear system would be of the form where δxis the deviation of the state vector x around the equilibrium state and δuis the deviation of the input u around the specific input required to maintain the equilibrium state. For the model at hand, the coefficient matrices can be worked out to The reader is encouraged to compute the eignevalues of A for the following parameters: M =3 kg, m =0.2 kg, l=0.31 m, and b=0.1 Ns/m. It should turn out that some of the eigenvalues have positive real parts. That corresponds to an unstable system. The eigenvalues, also called system poles, can be relocated by MATLAB commands acker and place. Such a relocation is useful not only to stablize a system but also to achieve desired closed-loop behavior such as good damping and a fast response.