History of nonlinear control dates back to 18 th century when centrifugal "flyball" governor was invented to control steam engine by regulating the admission of steam into the cylinder. However, the governor was made to work without concrete analytical concepts BIB109353893 . In 1892, A.M. Lyapunov, a Russian mathematician, presented two methods in order to determine the stability of dynamic systems described by Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE). The second method called as direct method of Lyapunov, can determine stability without actually solving the ODE and thus finds potential in stability analysis of nonlinear control systems  . Lyapunov showed that if the linear approximation of a system is stable near an equilibrium point, then the truly nonlinear system will be stable for some neighborhood of that point. Lyapunov's work was translated into French in 1907 and recovered in control context later by Kalman and Bertram. Other noticeable works which benefited nonlinear control include Van der Pol's research on electronic oscillations and Duffing's findings on nonlinear vibrations. Based on the proposed nonlinear second order equations, approaches were developed to predict various phenomena of nonlinear systems, which include subharmonic oscillations, limit cycles, jump phenomena and frequency entrainment. As a subject, control engineering was in its infancy till late 1930s when scientific community started to face the problem of servomechanisms control  . Such mechanisms, approximated by second order systems, were dealt with the phase plane method, introduced by Poincaré. The event of Second World War boosted research in nonlinear control of servomechanisms due to the functional requirements imposed by fire-control systems and control of guided vehicles. During 1940-1960, three main analytical approaches used for analyzing nonlinear systems include; the describing function, the phase plane method and various methods involving relay systems. In the classical era, most problems involved single input, single output, linear, finite dimensional and time-invariant systems. Year 1960 is considered as start of modern era for nonlinear control BIB109353893 . This is the same time when the first International Federation of Automatic Control (IFAC) congress was held in Moscow, which brought theory of mechanics and Nyquist-Bode feedback theory closer to create to-day's control theory. The two key application drivers during this time were defense and space race. Other industrial avenues where nonlinear control were applied include automobiles, ships, steel, paper, minerals etc. The nonlinear, time varying, highly dimensional, poorly modelled and multivariable nature of the encountered real systems were outside the bounds of classical control theory. The digital computer was first introduced as a design tool and later as a component of a control system. In early 1970s, scientists investigated that the notions of energy and dissipation are linked with Lyapunov theory. So, dynamic systems can be viewed as energy transformation mechanisms. Based on this concept, Willems Jan proposed a theory for dissipative systems  . In 1990s, Sontag and Wang proposed theory of input-to-state stability for nonlinear control systems BIB13893551 , which can analyze stability of complex structures based on behavior of elementary subsystems and has been successfully applied to biological and chemical processes BIB54730875 . In 1995, Isidori presented geometric control theory by introducing the concept of zero dynamics  . With the ability to analyze controllability and observability, differential geometry finds enormous potential in the domain of nonlinear control systems. A critical review of early history of nonlinear control shows that concepts related with optimality, stability and uncertainty were descriptive rather than constructive. 1990s is considered as decade of 'activation process' when the descriptive research was being transformed into formal design methods through constructive procedures BIB205866696 . Table 1 summarizes prominent historical advances which directly or indirectly enriched the domain of nonlinear control systems.