The most effective and advanced nonlinear control schemes are the adaptive controllers. The basic idea of an adaptive controller is to estimate uncertain parameters and to tune the controller online to adopt to the dynamic situation where the variations in the system parameters or environment are significant. Adaptive control got more popularity in 1950s in the aerospace control community. However, due to lack of well-understood stability tools and proper hardware, it lost its charm. Another particular reason for this loss of interest was incident of the plane crash which was controlled by an adaptive law BIB14823361 . Nevertheless, interest in adaptive control has revived especially in social robotic because of its suitability for a highly nonlinear, unstructured and dynamic human environment as compared to the controlled and well-ordered industrial work cells. In general, there are two main types of adaptive control schemes i.e. Model Reference Adaptive Control (MRAC) (see Fig. 8 ) and Self Tuning Adaptive Control (STAC) (Fig. 9) . In MRAC, the adaptation mechanism estimates suitable parameters, so that the system behave the same as the reference model. In STAC, the slowly varying parameters or unknown constants are optimized so as to minimize/ maximize an objective function typically minimization of error or maximization of efficiency. BIB19938625 Adaptive controllers may employ dynamic model and estimate the uncertain parameters BIB106690519 or may be dynamic model free. Model based adaptive controllers can be easily tuned and their performance is usually better as observed be Khan et al. BIB19938625 . However, dynamic model becomes very cumbersome as the DOF increases. This may results in computational and communication issues thus making the implementation of dynamic model based adaptive schemes more challenging. Therefore, dynamic model free adaptive controllers can be the best choice for a high DOF plant, eliminating the need for a dynamic model.