.

Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Office of the Secretary
300 E. JOPPA ROAD· SUITE 1000 • TOWSON, MARYLAND 21286-3020 (410) 339-5000· FAX (410) 339-4240· TOLL FREE (877) 379-8636· VITTY (800) 735-2258· www.dpscs.state.md.us

STATE OF MARYLAND
ROBERT L. EHRLICH, JR. GOVERNOR
MICHAEL S. STEELE LT. GOVERNOR
MARY ANN SAAR SECRETARY
G. LAWRENCE FRANKLIN DEPUTY SECRETARY
MARY L. LNERS, PH.D. DEPUTY SECRETARY

June 27,2006

DIVISION OF CORRECTION
DIVISION OF PAROLE AND PROBATION
DIVISION OF PRETRIAL DETENTION AND SERVICES
PATUXENT INSTITUTION
MARYLAND COMMISSION ON CORRECTIONAL STANDARDs
CORRECTIONAL TRAINING COMMISSION
POLICE TRAINING COMMISSION
MARYLAND PAROLE COMMISSION
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION BOARD
EMERGENCY NUMBER SYSTEMS BOARD
SUNDRY CLAIMS BOARD
INMATE GRIEVANCE OFFICE

Mr. Vernon Evans #172357 Maryland Correctional Adjustment Center 401 East Madison Street Baltimore, Maryland 21202
RE: IGO Case No. 20060555 Dear Mr. Evans:
Enclosed is a copy of the Order resulting from the hearing of your complaint by the Office of Administrative Hearings.
Mary Ann Saar Secretary

Enclosure c: Commissioner Frank C. Sizer, Jr.
Inmate Grievance Office Warden Lehrman Dotson Assistant Attorney General Scott Oakley Stephen Hut, Jr., Esq., WilmerHale Anne Harden Tindall, Esq., WilmerHale Anne H. Geraghty, Esq., WilmerHale

~:

- : .. '" .

:. ,

VERNON EVANS. # 17').357 GRlEVANT v.
MARYLAND DIVISION OF CORRECTION

'" BEFORE DENISE OAKES SHAFFER,
* AN ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE * OF THE MARYLAND OFFICE
* OF ADMINISTRATIVE HBARlNGS
* OAHNO.: DPSC-IGO-OO2-06-19279 * 100 NO.: 20060555

*

*

'"

'"

*

=10

>Ie

*

=10

*

PROPOSED RULING' ON CROSS MOTIONS FOR SUM:MARY DECISION

STATEMENT OF THE CASE
ISSUES
SUMMARy oF, ~ EVIDENCE
I?ISCUSSION
CONCLUSION'S OF LAW
PROPOSED ORDER

STATEMENT OF THE CASE

On March 14,2006, Vernon Evans, #172357, filed a grievance with the InIbate

Grievance Office ("100"). The grievance is ,an appeal ota denial of a Request for

Administrative Remedy filed ort December 9,2005. The Warden at Maryland Correctional
Adjustment Center ("MCAC") denied the Request on January 3,2006. Mr. Evans appealed to

the Commissioner of Correction. The Assistant Commissioner of Correction denied the appeal

on February 27,2006.

After the 100 denied a request by the Division of Correction ("DOC") to stay the

hearing. the grievance was forwaided to the Office of Administrative Hearings ("OAH"). On

April 7, 2006. the DOC filed a Motion for Summary Pecision. Mr. Evans responded to that

Motion and filed his own Motion for Summary Decision on Apri124. 2006. The DOC

responded on May 9, 2006. Scott Oakley, Assistant Attorney General~ represented the DOC. A. , r

"

Stephen Hut. Jr., Anne Harden Tindall and Anne H. Geraghty of the law firm of Wilmerliale

represented Mr. Evans. I conducted a hearing on the Motions on May 15,2006 at the.OAR in

Hunt Valley, Maryland. Md. Code Ann., Corr. Servo § 10-207(c) (1999).

The contested case provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, the IOO's general

regulations and the OAH's Rules of Procedure govern procedure in this case. Md. Code Ann.,

State Gov't §§ 10-201 through 10-226 (2004 & Supp. 2005); Code of Maryland Regulations

("COMAR") 12.07.01.08 and .09; and COMAR 28.02.01.

ISSUES The Motions for Summary Decision raise these issues:

1. Db the procedures by which the DOC intends to execute Mr. Evans vi9hlte

section 3~905 of the Correctional Services Article, the Maryland Declaration of Rights and the .

U.S. Constitution?

2. Do the execution protocols constitute regulations that must be adopted in

compliance with the Administrative Procedure Act ("APA")?

3.

Will the e~ecution protocols, as applied to Mr. Evans, result in a cruel and

unusual punishment?

Exhibits

SUMMARY OF THE EVIDENCE

An exhibit list is attached to this decision.

DISCUSSION In a grievance concerning an institutional administrativ~ decision, the grievant bears the

burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the action taken was arbitrary and

2

, .

· .1·

capricious, or in violation of the law. COMAR 12.07.01.09A; COMAR 12.07.01.09C(1). COMAR 28.02.01.16D sets forth the OAH procedural rule on summary decision:
D. Motion for Summary Decision. (1) A party may move for sununary decision on any appropriate issue in the case. (2) A judge may grant a proposed or :qnal summary decision if the judge finds
that:
(a) There is no genuine issue of material fact; and
'(b) A party is entitled to Prevail as 8. matter of law.
This regulation is substantially similar to both Maryland Rule of Proce4ure ("Md. Rule") 2;-501
and Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure ("Fed. R. Civ. P.'~).
I find that there are no material facts in dispute with regard to the question of whether the
execution protocols are regulations required to be adopted in compliance with the APA. Because
I find that portions of the execution protocols are regulations, Mr. Evans is entitled to prevall ai a .
matter of law on this point. 1 I find that there are no material facts in dispute with regard to the question of whether the execution protocols violate section 3-905 of the Correctional Services Article, the U.S. Constitution or ~e Maryland Declaration of Rights. Because I find that the
answer to that question is compelled by the Court of Appeals decision in Oken v. State. 81 Md.
580, 851 A.2d 538 (2004), the DOC is entitled to prevail as a matter of law on this point. I find
that there are material facts in dispute concerning whether the state of Mr. Evans' veins will render the execution protocols, as applied to him, violativ~ of the Eighth A~endment prohibition
on cruel and unusual punishment. Therefore, an evidep.tiary hearing would be required on this
point.

1 Ordinarily a decision on this question would end further inquiry. Because this is a. proposed decision. however. and for reasons of efficiency, I will address all of the arguments raised by the parties.
3

Portions of the execu~ion pr9tocols are re~lations that have not been

adopted as required by MarvIand's APA and are therefore ineffective.

,

'

Mr. Evans argues that the e](;ecution protocols found in the Execution Operations Manual

(DOC Ex. D) and as described by James V. Peguese, the Execution Commander, in two

affidavits (DOC Ex. A & K) are regulations that were not adopted in compliance with the APA.

The DOC argues that the protocols are not regUlations because (1) they do not have general

application; (2) they concern only internal management of the DOC and do not directly affect the

rights of the public; (3) there is no specific statutory direction to p.romulgate regulations; and (4)

portions of the protocols have been detennined to be confidential because they implicate security

concerns.
The definition of regulation is found in section 10-101 (g) 0) of the State Government

Article:

n(1) "Regulation" means a statement or an amendment or repeal of a statement that:

(i) has general application;

(ii) has future effect;,

(iii) is adopted by a unit to:

1. detail or carry out a law that the unit administers; 2. govern organization of the unit; 3. govem the procedure of the unit; or 4. govern practice before the unit; and

(iv) is in any fonn, including:

1. a guideline; 2. a rule; 3. a standard;
4. a statement of interpretation; or
5. a statement of policy.

(2) "Regulation" does not include:
4

(i) a statement that: 1. concerns only internal manageinent of the unit; and 2. does not affect direCtly the rights of the public or tbe
procedures available to the public; (ii) a response of the unit to a petition for adoption of a regulation, under § 10-123 of this subtitle; or
(iii) a declaratory ruling of the unit as to a regulation, order, or statute. under Subtitle 3 of this title. (3) "Regulation," as used in §§ 10-110 and 10-111.1. means all or any portion ofa regulation.
The DOC points to specific steps in the execution process ~d argues that each step is not
signifjcant enough to warrant codification in a regulation. The procedures governing the execution of an inmate are not mere "routine management guidelines." Rather, they detaii the
minute steps and delicate procedures that a successful ex.ecution requires. While many of the
individual steps are small, none are insignificant, and, as the DOC argued, executions in Maryland are rare, rendering any execution something other than routine. The culminatio~ of these discreet steps is an execution that satisfies the high s'tandards stemming from the U.S. Constitution's and the Maryland Declaration of Rights' mandate for a hUmane death. ' Thus, it is misleading to look at each step in the process individually and to argue that each seemingly inconspicuous step does not rise to level of a guideline, rule or standard. Instead, each step is
carefully and precisely linked to the surrounding steps requiring that the execution protocols be
consider~d as a whole when assessing whether compliance with the APA is required.
When the steps in the execution protocols are considered together, it is clear that they embody a guideline or rule that has general application and future effect. The DOC argued that
the protocols do not have general application because they apply only to those few inmates under
5

.•...

a sentence of death. This argument is unpersll,asive. The protocols apply to all inmates under a

sentence of de~th. If there were hundreds under that sentence, the same protocols would apply.

This is not the case where a rule applies randomly to a single person or entity as in Dep't of

Health. and Mental Hygiene v. Chimes, 343 Md. 36, 681 A.2d 484 (1996). Rather these .

procedures apply to every similarly-situated inmate. The fact that the relative number of inmates

under a sentence of death is small is iirelevant. See I?elmarva v. Power & Li~t Co., 370 Md. 1,

26, 803 A.2d 460. 474 (2002) (rules dealing with narrow subject matter are nonetheless

regulations); Deplt ofPubL Safety and COlT. Servs. v. Demby, 390 Md. 580, 606-607, 890 A.2d

310, 325-326 (2006) (rule is regulation where it "substantively affected the rights of a specific
group of inmates. "). It is also clear, and the DOC does not dispute. that the protocols have future

effect. In fact, ~he DOC represents that the protocols will be used in Mr. Evans' case as well as

in any executions that fo1l6w. Finally, the DOC has adopted the protocols to carry out the Death

PenaltyStatute, a law it is responsible for administering. Thus, the protocols clearly meet the
definition Of regulation found in section 10-101 (g)(l) of the State Government Article.

Similarly, the protocols are not excepted from the definition by subsection (2) of section

IO-IOI(g). As previously discussed, the protocols, when viewed as a coherent whole, address far

.

.

more than the internal management of the DOC. They address how the DOC will accomplish

the awesome task of carrying out a sentence of death. The DOC is charged Wi~ accomplishing

this task without offending the Eighth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution or Article 25 of the

Maryland Declaratioll of Rights. Ensuring that the State complies with the Constitution is an

interest in which all Maryland citizens have a stake, not just those under a sentence of death.

The recent COllIt of Appeals decision addressing the issueof whether the DOC was

tequired to promulgate regulations governing the discipline of inmates in the DOC system

.6

supports this analysis. Massey v. SecretarY. Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services. 389 Md. 496,886 A.2d 585 (2005). First, the Court reviewed the history of the directives governing disciplinary proceedings within the DOC. Originally. the DOC was sued in federal court and agreed to several federal court orders requiriIig certain procedures to ensure
.. that the inma~es subject to the rules were afforded 'their due process rights. See Bundy. v. Cannon, 453 F.Supp. 856 (D~ Md. 1978) and ;6undy v. Cannon. 538 F.Supp. 410 (D. Md, 1982). The fundamental public right was an inmate's liberty interest protected by the Fourteenth Amendment. Massey, 389 Md. at 514, 886 A.2d at 595. The consent orders eventually expired and evolved into the directives which governed disciplinary proceedin~s prior to the Massey
decision.;! The Court concluded that because the directives "proceeded ~m and were designed to implement, a basic Federal due process requiremeI1t" there ~as "powerful evidence that they
were not merely guidelines for routine, or even non-routine; internal management. subject to
change at the whim of the Secretary or Commissioner." Massey, 389 Md. at 516, 886 A.2d at 597.
A similar situation exists here. The execution protocols developed by the DOC are designed to protect the pubHc's and the inmate's Eighth Amendment interest in a humane death that is neither cruel nor unusual.3 The protocols should not be subject to change at the whim of the Secretary or the Commissioner. The protocols affect constitutionally-derived fundamental rights and do not merely order the transaction of the agency's business. Massey, 389 Md. at 518, 886 A.2d at 598.

2 The DOC has since promulgated emergency regulations governing inmate disciplinary proceedings. COM:AR

12.02.07 (33 Md. Reg. 1 (March 31, 2006».

.

3 The Court of Appeals e~pressly acknowledged that the general public has a right to ~ concerOed. about

humanitarian and civil rights issues. MasseX. 389 Md. at 522, 886 A.2d at 600,

7

As was the case in Massey, references to cases from other jurisdictions are not persuasive. For example, the DOC relies upon Abdur!rahman v. Bredesen, 181 S.W.3d 292 (Tenn. 2005) for the principle that the lethal injection protocol is not a "rule" required to be adopted in compliance with Tennessee's Administrative Procedure Act. The Tennessee APA, however, contains a specific exemption for "statements concerning inmates of a correctional or detention facility." Tenn. Code Ann. §4-5-102(1O)(G). The Maryland APA contains no such exemption. In fact, the DOC has proposed that this exemption be adopted as part of Mw.]'land's APA and that legislation has not passed. See BE 432 (2006 Session).
Moreover, the fact that,there is no specific statutory direction to promulgate regulations in the Death Penalty Procedure Statute is not controlling. There is a gener-a1 direction in section 2-109 of the Correctional Services Article:
(c) Correctional facilities.- (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Secretary shall adopt regulations to govern the poIici,es and management of correctional facilities in the Division of Correction in accordance with Title 10, Subtitle 1 of the State Government Article. (2) Paragraph (1) of this subsection does npt apply to a guideline pertaining to the routine internal management of correctional facilities in the Division of Correction. Md. Code Ann.~ Corr. Servo §2-109 (1999 & Supp. 2005). This directive applies to the Secretary in this context. There is no need for the General Assembly to repeat it each time it passes legislation concerning correctional facilities. Finally, the DOC argues that some portions of the execution protocols are confidential because they implicate security issues immediately preceding an execution. I agree that some details, specifically how and where the inmate is moved in the days leading up to the execution, should not be the subject of regulation. As the redacted Execution Operations Manual and the
8

· '
Affidavits of Mr. Peguese demonstrate, however. the majority of the pJ:"ocedures in the protocols
are not confidential and should be codified in regulations.
As the protocols clearly meet the defmition of ~egulation and are not excluded from the
definition, i~ follows that the protocols should have been adopted in compliance with the APA. Because the protocols were not so adopted, they are legally ineffective.
The decision of the Court of Appeals in Oken v. State, 381 Md. -580, 851 A.2d 538 (2004) requires a rejection ofMr. Evans' clabn ibat the execution protocols
fail to comply with Section 3·905 of the Correctional Services Article. Mr. Evans argues that the portions of the execution protocols found'in the Execution Operations Manual (DOC Ex. D) and described in the Affidavit ofJames V. Peguese (DOC Ex~
are A), invalid for the additional reason that they conflict with the language of the Death Penal':;y
Procedure Statute. Md. Code Ann., Corr. Servs. §§ 3-901 - 09., The specific conflicts alleged are: (1) that the Statute requires the administration of (a) "a lethal quantity of an ultra shortacting barbiturate or other similar drugs" followed by (b) "a chemical ~aralytic agent" while the protocols require three drugs to be administered; (2) that the Statute requires "continuous intravenous adrninis~ation of' these drugs while the protocols require administration of the drugs in separate bursts; and (3) that the Statute requires the execution to be perfonned by persons trained to administer the lethal injection while the protocols require the hiring of "trained" persons without defining the word "trained." Md.. Code Ann. §§ 3-905(a) & 3906(c)(1); (DOC Ex. D).
In Oken v. State, 81 Md. 580, 580-1,851 A.2d538, 538 (2004) the Court of Appeals held:
[TJhe method of execution intended to be implementedby the Division of Correction does not violate the provision of Maryland
9

Code §3-905 of the Correctional Services Article or constitute a cruel and unusual punishment.
Judge Bell's di~sent makes it clear that Mr. OIren raised the same argume~ts that:Mr. Evans

raises here. Specifically, Judge Bell argued that the method of execution conflicts w.ith the

statute based on the number of chugs used - three rather than two and on the method of their

" administration - in burSts rather than a continuous flow. Oken, 381 Md. at 581-2,851 A.2d at

539 (Bell, CJ., dissenting). The Execution Operations Manual has not been revised sinc~ Mr.

Oken's execution. According to ¢e DOC, the same procedure used to execute Mr. Oken in Ju~e

of 2004'will be used to execute Mr. Evans (DOC Ex. K,Affldavit of James Peguese).
Mr. Evans argued that the ~ decision is less persuasive becaus~ it was a short, p€!r
He curium opinion. also argued that he has aSked the Court of Appeals to reconsiru,f the Dken

decision in his case cuaently pending in the Court of Appeals. I am unpersuaded by Mr. Evans'

arguments that I am not bound by the precedent in the Oken decision. Even if I agreed with
I
Judge Bell, I am not free to disregard the majority opinion. Moreover, if the Court of Appeals

does reverse its decision in Oken, and holds in Mr. Evans' case that the execution protocols and

resulting method of execution is invalid, then that decision would·render this decision moot.

, ..

'Consequently, I find that the DOC is entitled to prevail as a matter of law on this issue. I propose

that the DOC's Motion for Summary Decision on the issue of whether the execution procedures

conllict with the statute or constitute generally a cruel and unusual punishment be granted.

There is a dispute about a material fact, namely, whefher Mr. Evansl veins can withstand the method of ~u:tiQn. Thus, au evide~tial"Y hearing is required
before the f'mder of fact can'determine whetheJ.' the method of execution, as applied to lli. Ev~s, would constitute Q cruel and unusuai punishment
in violation of the Eighth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and Article 25 of the Maryland Declaration of Rights. '

10

..
"
his Mr. Evans has alleged that decades of heroin U$e has compromised veins in slich a
way that intra-venous ("IV") access to his body cannot reliably be achieved through his arms.
He argues that the thre8 drug injections and the bursts used by the DOC t6 admiriister the drugs
will not effectively deliver the drugs and that he will suffer an inhumane death as a result. The
DO~ argues that Mr. Evans' veins can withstand the methOd of exetution it intends to empl?y.
Each party has supported its argument with affidavits from medicai personnel who
inspected Mr. Evans' veins. Dr. Thomas Scalia examined Mr. Evans'veins and concluded to a
reasonable degree of medical certainty that Mr. Evans has "~o usable veins in his upper right "
extremity" and no "usable veins in his lower exfJ:emity." (Evans' Ex. 5 at pp. 7.,.9). He stated that
though it may be possible to establish an IV in Mr. Evans' left arm even though those veins are
also compromised. the rapid nature of the adininistration of the drugs create a risk that the veins
will. "rupture and the drugs will be ... only partly effective." (Evans' Ex. 5 at p. 8). Dr. Scalia suggested that a 'centralline is the only reliable means of venous access for Mr. Evans. In MarYland, only a physician may insen a cenr:raJ.line.
The DOC submitted the affidavits of a Certified Nurse Assistant and two Emergency Medical Technicians who also examined Mr, Evans. Each asserted that Mr. Evans' veins "seemed healthy enough, by sight and by touch, in our individual and collective opinions, to support an N catheter and fluid administration. II (DOC Exs. F, 0 & H at p. 2).
Clearly. there is a dispute about a material fact, namely, whether Mr. Evans' veins can
withstand the method of execution proposed by the DOC. While many of the facto~ relevant to " the issue of credibility, including relative qualifications and iength of examination of Mr. Evans.
·can be detennined based upon the affidavits, many other factors including demeanor and
response to cross-examination, can only be determined after an eviden~ary hearing. Thus, with
il

regard to whether the state of~. Evans' veins rende~ the e~ecution protocols unconstitutional as applied to h.im, summary decision is not appropriate.
. I propose that if the Secretary disagrees with and reverses the proposed decision on the
APA issue, that the case be remanded to the OAH for an evidentiary hearing.
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW Having considered the evidence and arguments presented. I conclude that Mr. Evans' Motion for Summary Decision on the issue of whether the e~ecution protocols are regulations should be granted. I conclude that the DOC's Motion for SUlIllilai'y Decision oil the issue of whether the execution protocols viC?late section 3-905 of the Correctional Services Article, the Maryland Declaration of Rights and the U.S. Constitution should be granted. OkeD v. State. 81 Md. 580, 851 A.2d 538 (2004). I also conclude that Summary Decision is inappropriate on the issue of whether Mr. Evans' veins can withstand the method of execution.
PROPOSED ORDER I PROPOSE that the Mr. Evans' Motion for Summary Decision be GRANTED in part. In the event that the Secretary affmns this decision no further order is needed. I PROPOSE that the DOC's Motion for Summary Decision be GRANTED in part.
"
I.PROPOSE that, if the Secretary reverses the decision granting in part Mr. Evans' Motion for Summary Decision, that the case be REMANDED to the OAH for an evidentiary hearing.

June 2, 2006 Date
Dosljc #81522

Denise Oakes Shaffer Administrative Law Judge

12

"

Vernon Evans #172357

-13-

IGO #20060555

DEPARTMENT OF
PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES
ORDER OF THE SECRETARY

In this matter, Vernon Evans, #172357, the Grievant, filed a grievance with the Inmate Grievance Office on March 14, 2006. The grievance was ultimately forwarded to the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), and motions for summary decision were filed both by the Division of Correction (DOC) and the Grievant. On May 15, 2006, a hearing was conducted on the motions at OAH.
The issues raised by the motions for summary decision are as follows:
Do the execution protocols established by DOC constitute regulations that must be adopted in compliance with the Maryland Administrative Procedure Act (APA), Md. Code Ann., State Government Article, Section 10-101?
Do the procedures by which the DOC intends to execute the Grievant violate Md. Code Ann., Correctional Services Article, Section 3-905, the Maryland Declaration of Rights and the U.S. Constitution?
Will the executive procedures, as applied to the Grievant, constitute cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the U.S. Constitution?
In a proposed ruling on the cross motions for summary decision, the Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) ruled as follows:
The execution protocols established by DOC are regulations which should have been adopted in compliance with the APA.
As the Court of Appeals held in Oken v. State, 81 Md. 580,851 A.2d. 538 {2004), the execution procedures do not violate the Correctional Services Article, Section 3-925, the Maryland Declaration of Rights or the U.s. Constitution.
Inasmuch as there is a dispute about the material fact; i.e., whether the Grievant's veins can withstand Maryland's method of execution, there must be an evidentiary hearing to determine whether an execution of the Grievant would amount to cruel and unusual punishment.
By way of background, it is important to note that the Grievant currently has cases pending in both state and federal court. Both the first and second issues raised by the Grievant were argued before the Court of Appeals in May 2006 and are currently awaiting decisions. The third issue is scheduled for trial in the United States District Court for the District of Maryland in September 2006. Therefore, it is likely that the decisions in these cases will be dispositive of the issues in this grievance.

Vernon Evans #172357

-14 -

IGO #20060555

I. The DOC has prepared an Execution Operations Manual (EOM or Manual) which provides details such as what staff will be involved in the execution process, what steps will be taken to prepare for an execution starting two weeks prior to the execution, postexecution procedures, who shall be present in the command center, and the lethal injection checklist. At issue is whether this Manual amounts to a regulation under the definition of "regulation" in the Md. Code, State Government Article, Section 10-101(g).

The definition of "regulation" from the above-cited statute is as follows:

(g) Regulation. -- (1) "Regulation" means a statement or an amendment or repeal of a statement that:

(i) has general application;

(ii) has future effect;

(iii) is adopted by a unit to:

1. detail or carry out a law that the unit administers;

2. govern organization of the unit;

3. govern the procedure of the unit; or

4. govern practice before the unit; and

(iv) is in any form, including:

1. a guideline;

2. a rule;

3. a standard;

4. a statement of interpretation; ot

5. a statement of policy.

(2) "Regulation" does not include:

(i) a statement that:

1. concerns only internal management of the unit; and

2. does not affect directly the rights of the public or the

procedures available to the public;

(ii) a response of the unit to a petition for adoption of a regulation,

under

.

§ 10-123 of this subtitle; or

(iii) a declaratory ruling of the unit as to a regulation, order, or statute,

under Subtitle 3 of this title.

(3) "Regulation", as used in §§ 10-110 and 10.111.1, means all or any portion of

a regulation.

While there is certainly a widespread interest in Maryland and throughout the nation, regarding the death penalty, the actual procedures involved in the execution of an individual concern only a very limited number of persons. Thus is raised the question whether the EOM truly has general application.

As the Court of Appeals held in Dep't. of Health & Mental Hygiene v. Chimes. Inc., 343 Md. 336, 681 A.2d 484 (1996), where a "growth cap" designed to limit reimbursements to private providers applied only to a limited number of providers in a particular program, then the rule in question was not one of "widespread application." Id. at 346.

Vernon Evans #172357

- 15-

IGO #20060555

The same can be said in this situation where the EOM, like the "rate cap" in the Chimes case, is certainly of interest to many people, it still is of very limited application. The test for determining whether a governmental procedure or guideline is a regulation is not simply whether it is a matter of public concern, but truly whether it has broad application to more than just a handful of persons. Moreover, the Division of Correction procedures "did not formulate new rules of widespread application, change existing law, or apply new standards retroactively to the detriment of an entity that had relied on the agency's past pronouncements. Id. at 346; Maryland Ass'n. of Health Maintenance Organizations v. Health Services, 356 Md. 581,601,741 A.2d 483 (1999).

Additionally, the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) rule-making requirements do not apply to "a statement that concerns only internal management of the court" and "does not affect directly the rights of the public or the procedures available to the public." State Government Article, § 10-101 (g)(2). As described above, the vast majority of the EOM deals with internal DOC procedures, such as who shall be on an execution team, what steps need to be taken in the days and then hours leading up to an execution, what . steps shall be taken post-execution, and what visits, mail, property, etc. an inmate may have before an execution. All of this is purely internal and does not affect the rights of the public or involve procedures available to the public.

The ALJ relies heavily on the Court of Appeals decision in Massey v. Secretary, DPSCS, 389 Md. 496, 886 A.2d 585 (2005) in which the Court ruled that the DOC, Division of Pretrial Detention and Services, and Patuxent Institution had to adopt their rules regarding inmate discipline through the APA rule-making process. However, a Significant difference between this case and Massey is that there was a specific statute authorizing the Commissioner of Correction to adopt regulations for the operation and maintenance of units in the DOC and requiring such regulations to provide for the discipline and conduct of inmates. Correctional Services Article, § 3-205. There is no analogous requirement in the statutes establishing Maryland's death penalty procedures. Correctional Services Article, §§ 3-901 - 3-909.

Moreover, the Court in Massey acknowledged that the "myriad of rules governing the details of prison life," including "rules governing security" do not constitute regulations under the definition in State Government Article, § 10-101(g). Massey, 389 Md. at 524. Of course, there are constitutional ramifications to many conditions of confinement, including rules pertaining to sanitation, hygiene, phone calls, mail, visits, etc.; despite this, the Court of Appeals has not considered these rules to require adoption under the APA.

Therefore, it is my conclusion that the EOM is not a regulation requiring adoption pursuant to the APA rule-making provisions. Thus, I reverse this portion of the ALJ's proposed decision.
II. In Oken v. State, 381 Md. 5809, 851 A.2d 538 (2004), the Court of Appeals held that the method of execution utilized in Maryland does not violate the Correctional Services Article, § 3-905 or constitute cruel and unusual punishment. Because the issues in this regard raised by the Grievant are the same as those raised in the Oken case, the holding in Oken is dispositive and requires affirmance of this portion of the ALJ's proposed decision.

Vernon Evans #172357

- 16 -

IGO #20060555

III. The Grievant asserts that his veins are compromised in such a way that intravenous (IV) access to his body cannot be obtained through his arms. He further argues that the method used by DOC to perform executions will cause him to .suffer an inhumane death. The Grievant supported his motion for summary decision on this point with affidavits from medical personnel. The DOC argued that it could perform the introduction of the drugs through IV access through his arms without resort to the need for a central line. This position also was supported by affidavits from medical personnel who examined the Grievant.

In her proposed decision, the ALJ concluded that there were material facts in dispute and that she could not make a final determination without an evidentiary hearing. As a backdrop to this is the fact that the federal court in Baltimore has scheduled a trial on these same issues for the week of September 18, 2006. I have no doubt that, absent some extraordinary circumstances, no matter the result in federal court, the matter will be appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit and the Supreme Court.

In light of the fact that the same issues are being litigated in federal court and in the administrative arena and to avoid an additional appeal to court from an administrative agency decision, it is my determination that a stay should be issued regarding any evidentiary hearing at OAH until such time as the United States District Court for the District of Maryland renders its decision in the Evans case. It is wellestablished by the Court of Appeals that in a proper case a court may stay proceedings pending the determination of another proceeding that may affect the issues raised.
Coppage v. orlove, 262 Md. 665, 278 A.2d 587 (1971). This will obviate the need for
the parties to present the same evidence in two different fora perhaps only weeks apart and also serve the interest of judicial economy.

CONCLUSION For these reasons, the proposed decision of the ALJ concerning the applicability of the APA rule-making process to the EOM shall be REVERSED. The portion of the proposed decision relating to Maryland's method of execution not being violative of state law or the U.S. Constitution is AFFIRMED. The part of the proposed decision requiring an evidentiary hearing shall be MODIFIED to the extent that the need for a hearing shall be stayed until the United States District Court for the District of Maryland renders its decision on the constitutionality of the execution procedures as applied to the Grievant.

1 SO ORDERED this ~

day of June, 2006.

REVIEW RIGHTS
You are entitled to file a petition for judicial review with the circuit court for the county in which· the institution you are confined is located within 30 days of the mailing of the decision. Md. Code Ann., Corr. Servo § 10-210(b). Md. Rules § 7-201 through 7-210. This decision may only be reversed or modified on appeal if any substantial right may have been prejudiced because a finding, conclusion, or decision of the agency: (1) is unconstitutional; (2) exceeds the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the agency; (3) results from an unlawful procedure; (4) is affected by any other error of law; (5) is unsupported by competent, material, and sUbstantial evidence in light of the entire record as submitted; or (6) is arbitrary or capricIous. The circuit court does not accept additional evidence or reassess the credibility of witnesses who have previously testified. Md. Code Ann., State Gov't. § 10-222(h).

VERNON BVANS, # 172357 GRIEVANT
Y.
VLARYLAND DIVISION OF CORRECTION

* BEFORE DENISE OAKES SF..AFFER,
* AN ADI\.1JNISTRATIVELAW JUDGE
* OF THE MARYLAND OFFICE
* OF ADMlNISTRATIVE HEA..TUNGS
* OAHNO.: DPSC-lGO-002-06-19279
* IGO NO.: 20060555

* *

*

*

;/<

*

*

*

FILE EXHIBIT LIST

*

*

>I<

IGO Exhibits:

# 1 December 9, 2005 Request for Adnrinistrative Remedy

# 2 January 3,2006 Warden's Decision on Request for Administrative Remedy

#3 February 27, 2006 Ass't Commissioner's denial of Appeal

# 4 Transmittal to OAR

DOC Exhibits:

A January 25, 2006 affidavit of James V. Peguese

B

March S, 1994 Letter and Testimony of Commissioner Lanham

C May 6, 1994 Article from Baltimore Sun

D Redacted Execution Operations Manual as Supplemented on May 22, 2006

E

January 23,2006 affidavit of Mark Dershwitz, M.D., Ph.D.

P

January 3 f, 2006 affidavit of Certified Nurse Assistant

G January 31,2006 affidavit of Emergency Medical Technician 1

H January 31, 2006 affidavit of Emergency Medical Technician 2

I

February 1, 2006 transcript of Motions hearing in U.S. District Court

J

January27, 2006 transcript of Motions hearing in U.S. District Court

Grievant's Exhibits:

# 1 March 13, 2006 DOC Ariswer filed in U.S. District Court case number L-:06-CV-

·0149

.

# 2 January 19, 2006 Mr. Evans' Complaint in U.S. District Court

# 3 January 19, 2006 declaration of Mark J. S. H~th, M.D.

# 4 January 25,2006 declaration of Denrus R ..Geise;r, DVM

# 5 January 25,2006 declaration of Thomas M. Scalia, M.D.

# 6 House Bi11498 (1994) Floor Report

# 7 January 17. 2006 memorandum

#: 8 January 25,2006 declaration ofVemon Evans, Jr.

# 9 Morales v. Hickman. U.S. District Court, Northern District of C!:Uifomia, February 14. 2006

# 10 Brown v. B.eck, U.S. District Court, Eastern District of North Carolina. April 7,
2006

# IIA January 24,2006 transcript of Motions hearing, U.S. District Court

# lIB January 27,2006 transcript of Motions hearing, U.S. District Court

# 11C February 1, 2006 transcript of Motions hearing. U.S. District Court

