Case 1:06-cv-00149-BEL Document 199 Filed 03/14/12 Page 1 of 2
(410) 585-3449
March 14, 2011 The Honorable Benson Everett Legg, Chief Judge United States District Court for the District of Maryland 101 West Lombard Street Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: Joint Status Report - Evans v. Maynard, et al., Civil No. L-06-149 Dear Judge Legg:
Please accept this letter as a joint status report from the parties in the above entitled case, pursuant to the Court’s order of February 22, 2007.
On November 19, 2010, the Secretary of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services published proposed death penalty regulations in the Maryland Register as required by the Maryland Administrative Procedure Act (“APA”), Md. Code Ann. State Gov’t §10-101, et seq. See Evans v. State, 396 Md. 256 (2006). In February, 2011, the Secretary withdrew the proposed regulations for further review. All executions in Maryland are stayed until the administrative regulations governing the death penalty process are properly adopted.
The Governor continues to evaluate Maryland death penalty practice and procedure, and wishes to postpone the formulation of the advertising plan ordered by the Court on December 7, 2006. The Governor would like to report back to the Court in

Case 1:06-cv-00149-BEL Document 199 Filed 03/14/12 Page 2 of 2 another ninety days. Accordingly, the defendants seek a postponement in this matter for an additional ninety days.
The plaintiff does not object to the defendants’ request for a ninety-day extension.
Thank you for your consideration of the defendants’ request.

c: Secretary Gary D. Maynard

Very truly yours,
/s/
Laura Mullally Assistant Attorney General

