• •

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF MARYLAND

VERNON EVANS, JR.,

*

Plaintiff,

*

vs.

*

MARY ANN SAAR, Secretary,

*

Department of Public Safety and

Correctional Services;

*

FRANK C. SIZER, JR., Commissioner,

Maryland Division of Correction;

*

LEHRMAN DOTSON, Warden,

*

Maryland Correctional Adjustment Center;

Civil Action No. 06-CV-00149 BEL

GARY HORNBAKER, Warden,

Metropolitan Transition Center;

*

and,

*

JOHN DOES,

*

Defendants.

*

MEMORANDUM OF LAW IN SUPPORT OF PLAINTIFF'S APPLICATION FOR TEMPORARY RESTRAINING ORDER AND MOTION FOR PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION

A. Stephen Hut., Jr. Todd Zubler Kalea Seitz Clark Anne Harden Tindall
WILMER CUTLER PICKERING HALE AND
DORRLLP 2445 M Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20037 (202) 663-6000 (phone) (202) 663-6363 (fax) stephen.hut@wilmerhale.com

Jeffrey O'Toole (Bar No. 03436) Julie S. Dietrich O'TOOLE, ROTHWELL, NASSAU &
STEINBACH
1350 Connecticut Avenue, N.W., Suite 200 Washington, D.C. 20036 (202) 775-1550 otoole@otrons.com dietrich@otrons.com

January 20, 2006

:MEMORANDUM OF LAW IN SUPPORT OF PLAINTIFF'S APPLICATION FOR TEMPORARY RESTRAINING
ORDER AND MOTION FOR PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION Plaintiff Vernon Evans, Jr., who is currently under a warrant for his execution during the week of February 6, 2006, seeks a temporary restraining order and preliminary injunction enjoining Defendants from carrying out his execution using the current practices and procedures of the Maryland Department of Correction (DOC) for lethal injection. Evans does not herein challenge the fact of his sentence of death generally, nor does he challenge the constitutionality of lethal injection. Methods of lethal injection that would comply with the United States Constitution exist and are available for use by Defendants. But, as the declaration of Dr. Mark Heath in support of the application and motion shows, DOC's practices and procedures arbitrarily and unnecessarily create a grave risk that Evans will suffer extreme pain during his execution, thus violating his rights under the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. Evans will suffer acute and irreparable harm if this Court denies preliminary relief, while the harm, if any, to Defendants stemming from that relief will be minimal. Because the balance of harms tips in Evans's favor, he need only present "grave or serious questions" to justify entry of a preliminary injunction, and he has clearly raised such questions. For these reasons, and because the public interest will be served by judicial consideration of Evans's claims, he is entitled to preliminary relief.
Statement of Facts Plaintiff Evans was convicted of two counts of murder in 1984. On January 9,2006, Baltimore County Circuit Judge John G. Turnbull II signed a Warrant of Execution, setting Evans's execution for
2

the week of February 6, 2006.11 Pursuant to Maryland Code Annotated, Correctional Services § 3-905, Evans would be executed by lethal injection.
Section 3-905 authorizes lethal injection using an "ultrashort-acting barbiturate, or other similar drug" and a "paralytic agent." See Md. Code Ann., Corr. Servs. § 3-905. Evans has attempted to obtain from the DOC its more specific protocol for carrying out executions, but the DOC has not been fully
n cooperative. See Tindall Decl. 2-6 (attached hereto as Exhibit A). Nearly a year ago, on March 7,
2005, Evans first sought access to DOC's current execution protocol and other related documents by making a public information request. [d. <JI 2.2/ DOC provided some documents on April 6, 2005, but it denied significant portions of Evans's request and significantly redacted portions of the documents that it did provide. [d. <JI 4. Evans has been litigating before a state administrative law judge the DOC's refusal to grant full access to the requested materials. [d. <JI 4-6. Based on the documents that DOC did provide and other documents obtained by Evans, it appears that the DOC's protocol has been amended over the years, including two amendments within the three weeks preceding the June 2004 execution of Steven Oken. [d. <JI 4.3-1

1/ A copy of the Warrant of Execution is attached hereto as Tindall Dec!. Exhibit 1.

']j

See Letter from A. Stephen Hut, Jr. to Jean Goodman, dated March 7,2005, and attached hereto

as Tindall Decl. Exhibit 2.

2!

Defendants provided Plaintiff with two heavily redacted Execution Operations Manuals pursuant

to a request under the Maryland Public Information Act. One of these Manuals was dated June 14,

2004, and the other was dated May 26, 2004. See Tindall Decl. Exhibits 3, 4. Defendants executed

Steven Oken on June 17,2004, see Susan Levine, Maryland Executes Oken, WASH. POST, Jun. 18,2004.

In litigation between Defendants and Steven Oken, Defendants produced yet another version of the

Execution Operations Manual, dated April 1, 1994. See Tindall Decl. Exhibit 7.

3

After the execution of Wesley Baker in December 2005, Evans attempted again to obtain the most recent protocol by filing another public information request on December 20, 2005 ...±! As of the time of filing of this Memorandum, DOC had refused to produce a complete copy of the most current execution
protocol. [d. at 16.
Once DOC is subject to compulsory discovery in this litigation, Evans will be able to address in more detail the State's execution procedures. But based on the portions of the execution protocols that Evans has obtained - either directly from the DOC or from other sources - the basic outlines of the State's execution procedure are clear, and the chemicals Defendants have elected and the practices and procedures by which they are administered create a grave and serious risk that Evans will suffer an agonizing death.
DOC has elected to inject condemned inmates with a three-drug cocktail of sodium pentothal, pancuronium bromide, and potassium chloride. See Tindall Decl. Exh. 6. Sodium pentothal is an ultrashort-acting barbiturate, intended to induce general anesthesia. See Heath Decl. at 138 (attached hereto as Exhibit B). Particular skill is required to administer this drug to achieve this. [d. Because of complications associated with maintaining anesthesia with sodium pentothal, when a surgical plane of anesthesia must be maintained for more than a matter of moments, drugs other than sodium pentothal are usually employed for such purpose. [d. If sodium pentothal is used both to induce and maintain a surgical plane of anesthesia, a qualified person must be present to assure that the drug has been correctly administered and is maintaining a state of unconsciousness. [d. As described in more detail below,
'±! See Letter from A. Stephen Hut, Jr. to Frank Sizer, Jr., dated December 20,2005, and attached hereto as Tindall Decl. Exhibit 5.
4

without the proper administration of this anesthesia, the DOC's use of the other two drugs used in the three-drug cocktail would cause excruciating, torturous pain.
Based on the information that the State has provided, however, no qualified person is required to be on hand for lethal injections carried out by Defendants. [d. at <JI<JI 8,24-25. Nor does any person-let alone a qualified person-monitor the plane of anesthesia achieved by administering sodium pentothal during an execution. [d. at <JI 41.
The risk that an inmate subject to lethal injection as conducted by Defendants will be conscious during his or her execution-already significant due to the absence of qualified personnel to ensure that a surgical plane of anesthesia is achieved and maintained throughout the execution-is compounded by Defendant's apparent:
(1) failure to employ persons proficient in achieving intravenous ("IV") access, which requires skill; (2) failure to take into account any individualized facts that affect appropriate dosage, such as Evans's body weight and his individual sensitivity to or tolerance to Defendant's chemicals of choice; and (3) failure to prepare for the very real possibility that, due to Evans's previous intravenous drug use, DOC personnel will not be able to access a peripheral vein, necessitating either a surgical "cut-down," wherein a vein is exposed by incision or is catheterized, or the invasive and painful processes of inserting a percutaneous central line, which involves tunneling under the skin to reach the subc1avaian or central vein.
5

[d. at <J[ <J[ 6, 8. In short, the DOC's practices and procedures create a constitutionally unacceptable risk that Evans will not be properly anesthetized when Defendants inject him with the second and third chemicals in the three-drug cocktail: pancuronium bromide and potassium chloride.
Pancuronium bromide and potassium chloride are both "paralytic agents." [d. at <J[ 9, 18. While the Maryland lethal injection statute requires use of a "paralytic agent," Md. Code Ann., Corr. Servs. § 3-905, pancuronium bromide and postassium chloride create excruciatingly painful sensations when injected into insufficiently anesthetized persons. Heath Decl. <J[ 6,23,43.
Pancuronium bromide serves no medical function in Maryland executions. Its use makes a prisoner look serene because the prisoner's muscles cannot move or contract to show pain, suffering, or any emotion. [d. at <J[ 16. The paralysis induced by pancuronium bromide, however, will ultimately cause an intense, painful death by asphyxiation if the prisoner is not adequately anesthetized. [d. <J[ 17. Desperately straining to draw breath, but with no corresponding muscle response, an inmate would not be able to signal that he or she is awake and experiencing the agony ofsuffocation. [d. Death by asphyxiation as a method of execution has been ruled unconstitutional as violative of the Eighth Amendment.~
The lethal-injection process employed by Defendants dictates that potassium chloride-the third chemical injected during executions-will cause death before asphyxiation caused by pancuronium is complete. [d. at <J[ 9. While a certain level of potassium chloride is needed for normal cardiac electrical activity, the quantity of potassium chloride administered in executions causes death by stopping the heart. !d. at <J[ 11. Potassium chloride affects the nerve fibers lining the veins, and there is universal
See Fierro v. Gomez, 865 F. Supp. 1387, 1415 (N.D. Cal. 1994); Fierro v. Gomez, 77 F.3d 301, 309 (9th Cir. 1996); vacated on other grounds, Gomez v. Fierro, 519 U.S. 918 (1996).
6

medical agreement that its administration to an inadequately sedated person would be agonizingly painful. Id. In an inadequately sedated-yet paralyzed-inmate, administration of potassium chloride
would cause extreme and protracted pain and would be torturous. Id. at en 11-13.
The risk of inflicting severe and unnecessary terror, torture, and pain upon Evans is made more dire because the practices and policies Defendants have devised for his execution do not (1) include adequate directions for preparation of drugs and training of staff, (2) establish necessary safeguards regarding the manner in which the execution is to be carried out, (3) require participation of qualified personnel in performing critical tasks in the lethal-injection process, (4) provide for necessary supervision of personnel, and (5) establish appropriate criteria and standards that these personnel must
rely upon in exercising their discretion during the lethal injection process. Id. at en 6, 8 , 24, 26.
Moreover, Defendants have conceded maladministration of at least one lethal injection-that of Tyrone Gilliam in 1998.Q1 On its website, the Maryland Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services ("DPSCS") declares that its lethal-injection procedure "lasts about seven minutes.,,11 According to newspaper reports, however, Gilliam's execution took 23 minutes.~ (Indeed, only one of the five lethal injections conducted by Defendants since 1994 - that of Flint Gregory Hunt in 1997 - has been completed within 7 minutes.2!) Throughout Gilliam's execution, a primary IV line leaked and liquids pooled on the execution room floor. Tindall Decl. Exhibit 8.
See Oken v. Sizer, 321 F. Supp. 2d 658, 667 n.7 (D. Md. 2004). 11 See http://www.dpscs.state.md.us/publicinfo/capitalpunishmentlhistorical.shtml (last visited January 18, 2006).
Caitlin Francke, Gilliam Executedfor '88 Slaying, BALT. SUN, Nov. 17, 1998. 2! Paul W. Valentine, A LOOK AT . .. Executions, WASH. POST, Jul. 20, 1997 (execution of Flint Gregory Hunt); Julie Bykowicz, In 9 Minutes, Witnesses Watch Death Take Hold, BALT. SUN, Jun. 19, 2004 (execution of Steven Oken); Eric Rich and Daniel de Vise, Maryland Executes Woman's Killer,
7

Argument "The standard for preliminary injunctions is established ... by Blackwelder Furniture Co. v. Seilig Mfg. Co., 550 F.2d 189 (4th Cir. 1977)." Rum Creek Coal Sales, Inc. v. Caperton, 926 F.2d 353, 359 (4th Cir. 1991). Under Blackwelder, a District Court presented with a motion for preliminary injunction must consider: (1) "the likelihood of irreparable harm to the plaintiff' if the motion is denied, (2) "the likelihood of harm to the defendant" if the motion is granted, (3) "the likelihood that the plaintiff will succeed on the merits," and (4) "the public interest." Id. These considerations are not of equal weight. The balance of harms between the plaintiff and defendant is the "more important" consideration. Blackwelder, 550 F.2d at 196. "If that balance is struck in favor of plaintiff, it is enough that grave or serious questions are presented; and plaintiff need not show a likelihood of success." Id. A temporary restraining order is proper to maintain the status quo until the court can hold a hearing on the request for a preliminary injunction. For that reason, the Federal Rules focus the court's inquiry on whether "irreparable injury, loss, or damage will result to the applicant before the adverse party or that party's attorney may be heard in opposition." Fed. R. Civ. P. 65(b).101 Evans satisfies the requirements for both a temporary restraining order and a preliminary injunction. First, in the absence of an injunction, Evans would obviously, and necessarily, suffer the most severe form of irreparable harm-he will be executed pursuant to practices and procedures which create a grave and unnecessary risk that he will suffer excruciating pain during his lethal injection. See
WASH. POST, Dec. 6, 2005 (execution of Wesley Baker); Paul W. Valentine, Execution of Thanos Went "Like Clockwork," WASH. POST, May 18, 1994. 101 See Charles Alan Wright et aI., llA Federal Practice and Procedure § 2951, at 256-57 (1995); see also Univ. of Texas v. Camenisch, 451 U.S. 390, 395 (1981) (court must consider factors in light of purpose of preliminary injunctive relief, which is to preserve status quo until final merits can be considered).
8

Wainwright v. Booker, 473 U.S. 935 n.1 (1985) ("irreparable harm" is "necessarily present in capital cases"). Second, preliminary relief causes minimal-if any-harm to the Defendants. They remain free to execute Evans in compliance with Maryland's lethal-injection statute, Md. Code Ann., Corr. Servs. § 3-905. They must, simply, refrain from executing him in a manner that contravenes the dictates of the Eighth Amendment. Third, because the patent, severe, and irreparable harm that Evans "necessarily" faces outweighs any harm to the Defendants, Evans need only show that "grave or serious questions" are presented in this litigation, Blackwelder, 550 F.2d at 196. The arbitrary and unnecessary risk of an excruciatingly painful execution amounting to cruel and unusual punishment, detailed below, certainly presents such questions. Finally, a preliminary injunction will further the public's interest in insuring that executions carried out in its name comport with the dignity of humankind enshrined in the Eighth Amendment.
I. THE BALANCE OF HARMS FAVORS EVANS. Comparing the likelihood of irreparable harm to Evans if interim relief is not granted to any
harm that interim relief might cause Defendants leads to the inescapable conclusion that the balance of harms weighs heavily in Evans's favor. As the Supreme Court of the United States has recognized, "irreparable harm" is "necessarily present in capital cases." See Wainwright, 473 U.S. at 935 n.l. If preliminary relief is not granted, Evans will be executed and no court will consider the merits of his claims. Furthermore, Evans will be executed pursuant to practices and procedures that pose a substantial risk of causing him excruciating pain and suffering, in violation of the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments.
Defendants, on the other hand will suffer no meaningful harm. The preliminary injunction Evans seeks does not implicate Defendants' ability to execute Evans in accordance with Maryland's lethal
9

injection statute, Md. Code Ann., Corr. Servs. § 3-905. Practices and procedures for execution, which comply with the Maryland statute and the dictates of the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments, are inexpensive and are available to Defendants.
II. EVANS PRESENTS "GRAVE OR SERIOUS" QUESTIONS REGARDING THE CONSTITUTIONALITY OF DOC'S EXECUTION PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES. "Because the death penalty is the most severe punishment, the Eighth Amendment applies to it
with special force." Roper v. Simmons, 125 S. Ct. 1183, 1194 (2005). In assessing the Amendment's application, the Supreme Court has recognized that its prohibition on "cruel and unusual punishment" is "not precise" and its "scope is not static." Trap v. Dulles, 356 U.S. 86, 100-01 (1958). Rather, "[t]he Amendment embodies broad and idealistic concepts of dignity, civilized standards, humanity, and decency ... against which [a court] must evaluate penal measures." Estelle v. Gamble, 429 U.S. 97, 102 (1976) (internal quotations and citations omitted). Thus, the Court has "held repugnant to the Eighth Amendment punishments which are incompatible with the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society ... , or which involve the unnecessary and wanton infliction of pain." [d. at 102-03 (internal quotations and citations omitted). In the context of capital punishment, these precepts apply to prohibit "something more than the mere extinguishment of life." Weems v. United States, 217 U.S. 349, 370-71 (1910).
Evans does not herein assert that either the death penalty or lethal injection generally violates "evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society." In theory, lethal injection-a pinprick, followed rapidly by unconsciousness and painless death-could comport with the "dignity, civilized standards, humanity, and decency ... against which [a court] must evaluate penal
10

measures." Estelle, 429 U.S. at 102. But Defendants' ability to effect a death without unnecessary and wanton pain is seriously in doubt.
The practices and procedures employed by Defendants in the lethal injection of condemned inmates purport to cause quick and painless death. In reality, however, as the attached declaration of Dr. Mark Heath, an expert in Anesthesiology, clearly shows, the chemicals selected, the haphazard and needlessly complicated procedures employed, the absence of properly credentialed personnel and medically necessary equipment, and the failure to plan for inevitable obstacles in the lethal injection of condemned inmates, among other deficiencies, create a grave-and most importantly, unconstitutional-risk that lethal injections in Maryland will involve agonizing and wholly unnecessary pain. Should Defendants execute Evans pursuant to these practices and procedures, they unnecessarily risk botching his execution-as they botched Gilliam's-and causing an insufficiently anesthetized man to experience the excruciating pain associated with the chemicals they have arbitrarily chosen to effect death. Furthermore, as detailed in the newspaper articles cited in Paragraph 36 of Evans's Complaint in this action, maladministration of lethal injection executions throughout the Nation is not uncommon, and there is no reason to believe, given the Gilliam execution and the insufficient standards described above, that the DOC is more competent than these other States.
Indeed, the drugs selected and practices and procedures employed by DOC in executing deathsentenced inmates do not even comport with prevailing standards for the euthanasia of animals. The American Veterinary Medical Association ("AVMA") Panel on Euthanasia has banned the use of neuromuscular blocking agents - such as pancuronium bromide alongside a general anesthetic, such as sodium pentothal. See Tindall Decl. Ex. 9 at 680. The State of Maryland has legislated its own ban to this effect. Md. Code Ann., Criminal Law, § 10-611. And while the AVMA does permit the use of
11

potassium chloride in animal euthanasia, it is only acceptable when a surgical plane of anesthesia is achieved and maintained by adequately trained personnel. Tindall Decl. Ex. 9 at 680-81. Surely, standards considered inhumane in the lethal injection of animals cannot comport with "evolving standards of decency" for the execution of human beings.
Courts applying the general principles of the Eighth Amendment to the practices a.l1d procedures involved in a particular execution protocol have focused on the amount of pain the inmate suffers and the speed with which unconsciousness is accomplished. See Campbell v. Wood, 18 F.3d 662, 684 (9th Cir. 1994) (execution by hanging constitutional where practices and procedures employed by State were designed such that "unconsciousness will be rapid and death comparatively painless"); Fierro v. Gomez, 77 F.3d 301,308 (9th Cir.) (execution by lethal gas violates Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments where "an inmate probably remains conscious anywhere from 15 seconds to one minute" and suffers "intense, visceral pain, primarily as a result of lack of oxygen to the cells"), vacated on other grounds, Gomez v. Fierro, 519 u.S. 918 (1996). The practices and procedures employed by Defendants create a grave risk that Evans will never be sufficiently anesthetized, or will regain consciousness at some point during his lethal injection, and will thus experience some combination of the fiery sensation of potassium chloride as it travels through his veins, cardiac arrest, and/or the intense, visceral pain associated with asphyxiation. As demonstrated by the execution of Tyrone Gilliam, this experience could last as long as 23 minutes. Paralyzed, Evans would appear serene, but in reality, he would suffer a torturous death. This the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments do not countenance.
The foregoing establishes a likelihood that Evans will prevail on the merits of his constitutional claims. But Evans need not show even this much. As demonstrated above, the balance of harms associated with preliminary relief tips in Evans's favor. As a result, he need only raise "grave or serious
12

questions." Blackwelder, 550 F.2d at 196. The practices and procedures employed by Defendants in the lethal injection of condemned inmates raise "grave or serious questions," without a doubt. III. THE PUBLIC INTEREST WILL BE FURTHERED BY PRELIMINARY RELIEF.
The DPSCS website advertises a quick and painless death for condemned inmates: "The procedure lasts about seven minutes. The worst physical pain being the prick of a needle."llI Presumably, this advertisement signifies a perceived duty on the part of the Defendants to carry out executions that are not unnecessarily lengthy or painful-in other words, executions that comport with the requirements of the Eighth Amendment. The public has an acute interest in ensuring that Defendants fulfill this duty. That interest will be served by issuance of preliminary relief so that Evans's claims may be adequately tested, and his execution by practices and procedures that unnecessarily and arbitrarily risk agonizing pain prevented.
Conclusion For the foregoing reasons, Plaintiff Vemon Evans's application for a temporary restraining order and motion for preliminary injunction should be granted.
See http://www.dpscs.state.md.us/publicinfo/capitalpunishmentlhistorical.shtml (last visited January 18,2006).
13

•
Dated: January 20,2006

Respectfully submitted,
, oole (Bar No. 03436) J ie letrich O'TOOLE, ROTHWELL, NASSAU & STEINBACH 1350 Connecticut Avenue, N.W., Suite 200 Washington, D.C. 20036 (202) 775-1550 otoole@otrons.com dietrich@otrons.com
A. Stephen Hut., Jf. Todd Zubler Kalea Seitz Clark Anne Harden Tindall
WILMER CUTLER PICKERING HALE AND DORR LLP
2445 M Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20037 (202) 663-6000 (phone) (202) 663-6363 (fax) stephen.hut@wilmerhale.com todd.zubler@wilmerhale.com kalea.clark@wilmerhale.com anne.tindall@wilmerhale.com
Counselfor Defendant Vernon Evans, Jr.

14

CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
I hereby certify that on this 20th day of January 2006, I caused a copy of the foregoing
pleading to be delivered by first-class mail to the Defendants at the following addresses:
MARY ANN SAAR, Secretary Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 300 East Joppa Road Suite 2000 Towson, Maryland 21286
FRANK C. SIZER, JR., Commissioner Maryland Division of Correction 6776 Reisterstown Road Baltimore, Maryland 21215
LEHRMAN DOTSON, Warden Maryland Correctional Adjustment Center 401 East Madison Street Baltimore, Maryland 21202
GARY HORNBAKER, Warden Metropolitan Transition Center 954 Forrest Street Baltimore, Maryland 21202
and to be served by hand delivery to the following:
J. Joseph Curran, Jr. Attorney General Office of the Attorney General 200 St. Paul Place Baltimore, MD 21202

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF MARYLAND

VERNON EVANS, JR.,

*

DOC Number 172357

Maryland Correctional Adjustment Center *

410 East Madison Street

Baltimore, Maryland 21202

*

Plaintiff,

*

v.

*

MARY ANN SAAR, Secretary,

*

Department of Public Safety and

Correctional Services

*

300 East Joppa Road

Suite 2000

*

Towson, Maryland 21286;

*
FRANK C. SIZER, JR., Commissioner,

Maryland Division of Correction

*

6776 Reisterstown Road

Baltimore, Maryland 21215;

*

LEHRMAN DOTSON, Warden,

*

Maryland Correctional Adjustment Center

401 East Madison StreeL_ _~~~~~~

*

Baltimore, Maryland 21202

*
GARY HORNBAKER, Warden,

Metropolitan Transition Center

*

954 Forrest Street

Baltimore, Maryland 21202

*

and,

*

JOHN DOES,

*,

Civil Action No. 06-149

Defendants.

*

******
DECLARATION OF ANNE HARDEN TINDALL

I, Anne Harden Tindall, declare as follows:

1. I am an associate at the law firm of Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP, attorneys of record for Vernon Evans, Jr., in the above-captioned matter. I am licensed to practice law in the State of North Carolina and the District of Columbia. I am familiar with the facts set forth herein, and if called as a witness, I could and would testify to those facts under oath.
2. On March 7, 2005, my colleague, A. Stephen Hut, Jr., a partner at the law firm of Wilmer Culter Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP, sent a letter to Jean Goodman, Secretary of the Maryland Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services ("DPSCS"), requesting access to certain records concerning lethal injection practices and procedures in Maryland pursuant to the Maryland Public Information Act ("MPIA"), State Government Article, §§ 10-611 to 628. Among the records requested were (1) documents describing the past and current procedures of the Maryland Division of Corrections ("DOC") for lethal injection; (2) past and current regulations governing lethal injections; (3) documents reflecting revisions to execution procedures; (4) documents related to the drugs used in lethal injections and their administration; (5) records related to equipment used in lethal injections; and (6) notes, reports, statements, photographs, scientific reports, physical evidence, witness interviews, and other documents prepared in connection with actual executions.
3. Ms. Goodman forwarded Mr. Hut's March 7,2005, letter to Frank Sizer, Jr., Commissioner of DOC, as Commissioner Sizer is the custodian of the requested records.
4. On April 6, 2005, Commissioner Sizer responded to Mr. Hut's letter, granting in part and denying in part Mr. Hut's request for access to records concerning lethal injection. The records released included:
(a) an "Execution Operations Manual," dated June 14,2004, with nine pages redacted from sections of the manual addressing actions taken "Four Days prior to Execution WeeR" through "When the execution is completed";
(b) an "Execution Operations Manual," dated May 26, 2004, with nine pages redacted from sections of the manual addressing actions taken "Four Days prior to Execution Week" through "When the execution is completed";
(c) three "Lethal Injection Execution Logs" from the execution of Mr. Gilliam;
(d) the execution warrant for Mr. Oken;
(e) "Execution Reminders," sent via email, concerning the lethal injection of Mr. Oken;
(e) what appear to be three complete "Lethal Injection Execution Logs" from the execution of Mr. Oken, but the three documents bear different dates;
(f) four draft "New Releases" concerning Mr. Oken's execution;
(g) "IV Injection TraininglPractice Records";

(h) an article printed from the website www.sunspot.netconcerning Governor Ehrlich's lifting of the moratorium on executions imposed by Governor Glendening;
(i) the Warden's report on Mr. Oken's execution;
G) a "Summary Report" from a Technical Assistance visit by Maryland officials to "Oklahoma's execution-related staff' sponsored by the National Institute of Corrections;
(k) Directives concerning the death penalty issued by the Division of Corrections on September 15, 1998;
(1) Directives concerning the death penalty issued by the Division of Corrections on January 25,2000; and,
(m) Directives concerning the death penalty issued by the Division of Corrections on January 20,2004.
4. On May 5, 2005, Mr. Hut sent a letter to Commissioner Sizer requesting administrative review of the Commissioner's complete denial of access to some records and his substantial redactions of the records that were released. By letter dated June 17,2005, Commissioner Sizer delegated the matter to the Maryland Office of Administrative Hearings ("OAH") for an evidentiary hearing. That hearing is currently scheduled for January 24,2006.
5. On December 20,2005, after the execution of Wesley Baker, Mr. Hut sent a supplementary MPIA request to Commissioner Sizer, renewing the March 7, 2005 request as to any such records pertaining to the execution of Wesley Baker and clarifying that the request ________ . included autops)',. toxicology,_audsceneinvestigatiQI1I.ePQrts.uuQn theusameud~y. Mr.Jillt sellt an MPIA request to the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner of Maryland, requesting documents related to lethal injections, including autopsy, toxicology, and scene investigation reports. Neither Commissioner Sizer nor the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner has responded to these requests.
6. To date, DOC has not provided Evans with a complete copy of its Execution Operations Manual, or with other documents related to lethal injections included in Mr. Hut's MPIA requests, and it continues to contest release of those records in the OAH proceedings.
7. Attached as Exhibit 1 to this Declaration is a true and correct copy of the Warrant of Execution signed on January 9,2006, by Baltimore County Circuit Judge John G. Turnbull II setting Evans's execution for the week of February 6, 2006.
8. Attached as Exhibit 2 to this Declaration is a true and correct copy of the letter from A. Stephen Hut, Jr. to Jean Goodman, dated March 7,2005, containing a public information request seeking access to records related to lethal injection.

9. Attached as Exhibit 3 to this Declaration is a true and correct copy of the heavily redacted copy of an Execution Operations Manual, dated June 14,2004, provided to Mr. Hut in response to his public information request.
10. Attached as Exhibit 4 to this Declaration is a true and correct copy of the heavily redacted copy of an Execution Operations Manual, dated May 26, 2004, provided to Mr. Hut in response to his public information request.
11. Attached as Exhibit 5 to this Declaration is a true and correct copy of the letter from A. Stephen Hut, Jr. to Frank Sizer dated December 20,2005, supplementing Mr. Hut's original public information request to include records related to the December 2005 execution of Wesley Baker.
12. Attached as Exhibit 6 to this Declaration is a true and correct copy of a document entitled "Lethal Injection Checklist," identical copies of which were appended to both Execution Operations Manuals supplied to Mr. Hut in response to his public information request.
13. Attached as Exhibit 7 to this Declaration is a true and correct copy of the heavily redacted copy of an Execution Operations Manual, dated April 1, 1994, produced by Defendants in litigation with Steven Oken in the Circuit Court for Baltimore County.
14. Attached as Exhibit 8 to this Declaration is a true and correct copy of the affidavit of Jerome H. Nickerson, produced in litigation between Defendants and Mr. Oken in the Circuit Court for Baltimore County, describing problems encountered in the execution of Tyrone Gilliam and Defendants' response to those problems.
14. Attached as Exhibit 9 to this Declaration is a true and correct copy of the 2000 Report of the American Veterinary Medical Association Panel on Euthanasia.
I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct.
Executed on January 20,2006.

..05/05/2004 12:27
, ":~ :s-.
;

410-508-2012

PUBLIC DEFENDER

PA?E. 02

..

'.

..

..

~"""'--"'"

.....

'Ow _

...

...." . Depar~men~

......

.

• ., .. " ..... : ...~t.. ~.!......'~·!. .:". . . . :~' ......

s~a~e:ofoMa-ryland

of public Safety and correc~~ona~ Servi.Ce8

o
D~vision of Correction

o. ~~:.: - :~oo~-~t;..:-:'::.":..:#.......

~~"'."~"

-.

'it,
.. . ~:-':" ,.,.:.a
" :~-

- ... ......

Division of Corre~t~on Manual.

110-2

Execution ProcedUras

,t...

. "- -... ."..:

.._ :...-:....-..
'" ::."l:":.' " ...

._....:.o.~ ~:o.. rs..r~ ,. ·
_.-:""': 0'

." .. "

.....

_0
• •°
Revised 4/1/94.

• .,,0
......

.. :.

oj

" .....

.-

.-

.. -.........:

. '.

.,.05/05/2884 12:27
!,

4HI-508-2812

Xntroduetlon

PuaLIC~-
.. ·i

" ••.2 •••• :.• .;
PAGE 83

,., .

.-

... .... -':"'

' . :.. - t . "

.'

. :::--:-~.~~t·~~··~~f;

. -. .. -,

.,

- .. ~.. ~.~ :: " :... :.'

Sect.:i.on. IIr. section- tv
seet:1on -v
:Section VI -\ S$ction VIr

,:: . pre ....

-Ex
. .... :

a
.

c
~.

;u
":.

ti
'~'

o..

n.. ;....

·

l

'

!r
".

o

c

e

d

u

r

e

s

.

............ . \.

Execution proeedUres - Gas Chamber

: .. '... - ...........:: .....
.'

Execution ?roeednre~ - Lethal Injection Chamber

.. .Last Minute Stay or Revocation: of: th~ Warrant:

' • 'l'r'. :.~~.

... ..

or Execution

Section. IX

- Em

e

rgen

c

y-

Oper

at;i

on.
.

P.l..a._n_.

for

Lethal., Gas

chamber

....... ' - .. _ ....: 0 - - - ..... :" ...:

.--.: ........... .

Section XI. :-. Appendices..

'.

,-
. ":'.,

.-
Revised 4/1:./94

- .-"':

--

65/65/2684 12:27
• I'

4Hl-50S-2012 .

PUBLIC. IlEFENIl:R

p~ 84.

. .'
, .

..

,

'

.
.

...

-"""

-

.. .~.... ~ .

..

,....

.~.

~
.

..'..:.-';"..

.... ~ ...

." . ~."'"
.

..•.

...=-... - '" ....-::.:..;..-r!.,~"'!-- ~

.

".

'...,.

....... -~-:::~:.;~~*~:~: r.

~".'
., .

nn:J.ODliCTION·

~ ., . ' .... ~' '.

. '="'-=-='. ,_:~.:..:..:.-': :'-'..•. ~ ; ,~~: ~.:;~:-;.-~'.:. ,'_~.-:-: ....:\~~, -:;~~:~.~:,.,.:..;.~~it~~~~~~.:

'. 'In aycordanee with JlC1).~{1:Q-2{Refe.r '~o .App~d.ix· til this-- ~,:,~,:"" ......

Division of Correction manual,.; shall serve as.9U1de-l1neS'. for·the Commissioner of correetion's:. de~~:gnae,thiWarc1en:·o.f ,'!:lie.' 'Maryland Penitentiary, . and. any o'ther ,perso1Ul.6L assistinv, ·':'tCr.:en.sura~the..· '. ',_~H-;-: :.!:::".

t:>erformance o administerinq

f an of a.

elfeft:1h:ca1ie. nqtaas'nodrsluectcbeaslsful.1njeecxreecioUnti:wonbe-nb

y' :the·' ... Qrdered

to

do to

so' by a court. in the
estahlish procedures

St
fo

a
r

te o 'the

fcMa.raerYalnandd.t.re.a!~t.e. insta.losfo:i.'ri:nuateatn:edsed

sentenced to·suffer dea.th from the~ime a,warraatof execution.ie ,

. receiV'ed: 'thrOugh exe.cution. . :In' add:ie.ion,~·thiS' matiual identifies,'· ::::'.:..~f:/;:.

staff:. respons.lbilities, pur:suant i:.O. prepara.tiou and impJ.em~tation, . ,;:-:":.~::;;;. :

of the. axecu'tion process, including. bu~ not liml.ted to the. . , '~'.' "

operation of the death chamb~r.

.

. .

.

Article· 27. sec~ions 71 - 79 of the. Annotated Cod& of'

MarlLand (ACM) cover ~he requir~ments relate~ to the imposition

.Q.~-.,..-....h..~..D~!i.!=.'D. "_.ena.l't-:-t ,(.R.e_f;e.r .....0.,APPe.l.1.~...: ~••.. k&2.J'....;:'..,....•. .....: .•• ._........ : ..• '...'.;.,._.

. ·In accordance wim Ar1:icle.- 7.7, ,Sec:cion 71 (A.CM) ~ .offenders. :

sentenced. 1::0· suffer death, by a. cou-rt: ,in. the State. of Maryland' ..

shall. suffer: 'death by t:he, adm.1n1.sterillc;: of. l.ethal inj ec.C1on, .'

. Wll:e:ss- that .person. haS'. e-lec::t:ed, . in. wr1.tinq pd.OI: to. May 2:0, 19-94,

to .be executed by lethal gas in' a.<:cordanct~ with Article- 2.7,

Section 627 {ACM}. '

.

. In accordance with Article 211 Section 72 (ACK), the.

Commissioner or COrrection shall provide a'suitable· and efficte~

room or place in which executionS'may be carr1ea.out tha.t is .

enclosed from public view. This room of place sha.:ll have. all the-

necessary appliances for ~he ~roper execution of falons ~v the

adntinistering of a le'thal ·ga.s- or lethal injection.

-.. .

.......... '"

,'.

• 4

••

Revised 4/1/94 ,

......
. '.

, '.

'.

...65/95/2004 12:27 410-588-2912 ,-

-- -..- ------.-
PAr£. 85

'." '.

-,

Seet::ion r

.. '

•., ..;, !', ';-' llEA.'r'.W·BoU82'.. " ~ ,

....':. :

-,... -";.A...;..!'-.....

,

•

.o ••

.. ..... ~

e. :_ . . .

. . The: Commis'sipner of corredtionhas' de.si;inate4 .the Maryland ·-p~i.tent1.a....-y as: ,til.eplace. in' wp.ielI.dL·'eXeoi~ions orde.re.d: by' a: '..
court:: in the Sta:t.e of: Ha..-YUuid are: .;arr~e.c:t out~' T'ne.·- area so' d~s1g,o.ated. shall be mown. as the'Deai::h House .. The. Death .Hous.e. i.s
locat:ee:,CI,t:: '!:he we-st ,enl5., cf;.";:he. second.' £100:- 0:' the M~ryland .
penitentiary Hospital (aef$r to Appendix.*3)~

The- Oe.a;cb: HOUS'a- includes-.' a:: hoUJ;;inq- unit::with .'four' cell's ~. each, g feet:. ~. inches' ,100.q and ,1 feet 6 :!.nches w1de. Each cell-
ba.s ci wi~dow wi'i:h a. heavy. secur:f,€y- screen and· is' ,equipped With: a' .oed.; -toile":: and siilk wi'th hot and cold. =rinninq water. .An officer sta.tLon ane. shower is located. :l..n this area.

!.t u:;-o include~ So se.parata a::e.a known as ~e Deati::: Chambe.r.

The neath Chamher'~S divided into ~wo se~arata execu~ion are~s .
.' orie":- is:- kn.owii-'as the r.e\:bal. '!;nfeciion 'oamoer' area" !t' cons:ts1:$.' (Jf-'-'" ... , '''',,'

a witness r~om, a ~hemical. room~a s~ora~ room·and £ tethal

In.jecti.on roqm. The ·oi:.her is: known as the. Gas ChaJDber are.a. It"

consiS"tS' o.!· a If'itness. :;:OODt, a c$.emica.l x:oom, an ol?~ra..t1on6' room.. :

~ ~Gas' Chamber.

--

"

Revised. 4/1/94
...

- .....:.:-. ~.......:.:..-.-... -..~..

.-
, '
. .....,....1-

.as/as/2884 12: 27
i .,
,

410-5138-2012

PUBLIC IlEFENOCR

PAGE 86

--

.. , J

' ... ':

.' ,

R:E~sm::tr.rn:ls'

.....

'. '.

." , .' : .' .. :.'f.... : ':,:"-:, " '-.: ,'. ':-' ." ::.~>' :~:-;7,~~:?~J/-:::,,·:~;ili~:

A: ", ~'Tn,e': !cOimt1ss1oner-o'r-CO~~ctf6il:~8:l:1;i"1i€'respoiisi:bt'&~afr:"-":':"'''"':::':;;:~' , designating a person to supervise the executioll. The' ' , . , .";'....

the COllllltissioner's desil.;rnee shall be 1cn0Wll as- ·t:he Execution'
··o.:.tn1I1an.der•. He. sb.a~l be ass-isted by. , warden·, ~a.-rylend psnltentiary.' The EX&cut'ion cciiamandet:"sha:ll:: be- responsible'
for the overall operaei~ qf ~h1s procedure.

.
':- ~';::-,--:'r:­

'!'h~ Assistant'Wax:dent Ka.ryj;and·'Pen±'Centicu:-f· is responsible f~r all a.d:ininistt'ative, ac;:ti.vi.t'ie.s and ot:h~l:' assiqnments

de1.egated-eo him/her ,i~; ~e...:~Ve:n't:_of-· a. scheduled exec:ut1oo..~

•••

.....

....

-

•

;. <

- ..... '

_.

•

•

.....

c. The se.curity -C"nie.i 'is- ill· charge:: of- the:· Death:; wa~ch. 1'eai and-

.. :--- ".

is' responsible for the:' security of the condeilned ilUllat.e and

security operAtions related to this procedure. .

n. The ASsistant i.i~i:dell, .Hc.ryl~d. Correctional Adjustment
~ . 'Ceut;er (KCAC) 1.S ·responswle-:for al~ inst:itutional . . .~ .,,' .OEecatio,JlS. dw:::inq, 'the·· .t1lll(~: an: execut:ion..iS' in, proqress:..~ and.~".
'will act 'as Officer in Charge-' (OIe) of the.· command.! Operations -Ce.nter.

£.. :. 'l'1ie- ASsistant Co~.i:ssion~~ I Field. Se.rvices', is responsible.
for tra.ining, audi.'Cs< and. insPE!<:t.ions; re-la;ted'to cha' .oeaeh .

: ..

'HOuse and itS' operaC:::ion.

-- -

Execution Team .eabars are ·res~nS'ible. for all operations,

e.quip'ment and sanitatioll rela.ted to- the· Death· House.. one.

member of' the Execution Team sbould' be- 'designated:. as' ',arc:-by

the Exectttion Commander. . . . .

'.,

-' . ,.."...-

G. The correctional Maintenance Team. shall be reSPOnsibie- for·
all maLTJ.tenance and repairs/and will assist iD: a11~ .

traini.nq,

au:.d. it's....

a

nd . ,.

i

n

spe

c

t

i O l. ..i...s..

related

to

'the Death H.o. u.se..

Revised. 4/t/94-

".
/ . ., . . .'
;; .

. ;

.,85/85/2884

"-" ,-_ .., .... - ...- - .. "'- .--.-.-----""~ ~ ....... - .~- - . - . - - - - - . - . - ~.*,-.-, " ~'-'-. -"-.--.~ ' - ' - -

12:27

PUELIC DEf"EMJ.l:R.

PAGE 07

.'
• - '! •
. '

-, . "

......

.
,

. ..

- .....

• : "l!::!:".;'~';.:..~..:..::.~J~_;::-,.~:,::: :':.........:._: :.•.......:~. :...:~~~~~~:.:=:.O.:-~=....': :-~-:::.:.":''''.":!~'.-•~~-:''':':;::='-'.-<~~:~.:-:''~'-~~~:;~l

PRE:-EXBct1'.nON PROCEDtrRES

.. - .f"'''''''- .-

...

...

~..

A. nec'tltion· dates are' se·t.1n accordance wit:b. t.he provis'ions

Artic.le 2.7, 5ect"i:on 1.S tACM).. once the date'· is .set the

Execution commander will conduct activities as listed in

this' Manual-In addition, specific activit:ie.s as li,sced

below·' shal~ be!nitia.t:ed~.

3.

upo- n:-R' ec..e....l, .'. pt ..o..f a" W~ ar.r-a-.n' t of .h. ecu1;iOll the Warnen' Shall:'·' , -:i

of 1.

"Initiate a' log in 'a bound'ledger for the purpose' of '..
loqginq all activities and act-ions related to the.

warrant .execution. and the implementation of the

d.eath penalty.
.

2.....:.-.,....::.T.he;- receipt

9f

the.

wc...n::a.n't:.:.

sha:l:1.,.•b
'.-

e

log,qed - immediatel.y. '.

"
3 •., The' warr&n'C shall be haud-ca.i-ti.ed· to the records

depa.rt'.lllent supeX'Visor .by- a member Qf~he, Warden.' s.

.. - Staff.

. .

a. The. records supe...rvisor ili"'arl prepare· a letter of acknowledqement to the· Governor's. Office for the. Warden's signature (Refer to Appendix. #4) •.

a. 'Copies of the letter of ackriowledge1llent shall he- .
sent to parties named in Den 110~2, Se~t1on VI B 2 h.

. ... -......
..... ".

. 4. 1:.f no stay. aceompan.ie.d the' warrant; the warden shall. personally nQtifYth~ inmat~ ~ha~ the'warrant~r execution' bas, been. received;. this~ shalL be.· done: at' a::. private mee.ting'in the presence o"t' at least one witnes.s (Refer to ~ppendix 14(a).

j.l c.

.I. n. 'l'he.-.B.'.V.eJ;l.t That

a: sea.y.-· o£ EXeeuttion:

: . . . .,:

.. ..... ~

is.

Not
'.. ........

G ~

r

a

l

i

t

e

C

.:L ",

·

.

Revised 4/!/94-

' "

It;

..05/B5/2004 12:27 410-59B-2012

.. . . . . .. ,.......-- ••• - . - . - •• * •• --, -"

. . -, ----.~

PUBLIC riE:J:'E:NocR

PAGE: 89

"" . '\ -

. "'h~' exa.ct: date of the execution shall, be. Set by the

Executio,n ,Coupnander, in consultation' wi1;h the' .

collllllJ,.~sioner. rt shall be within the week -des1fJIlated iIi.:

the warrant, ' . ,

'.

.

:::,.: "

.' "" . :
2. -'!'he,. 't:iIle~ ofthe~'execut:'iQn shail'be- det:ermi.n.ed~.bT: the:' :-::.. :.:,~.~,. r··.·

'heCU1:-ion conuuander. . No announc9Il1en-e' of the- date.· or::' .'~~'::;-:~'~~':'-'

hour of'~ecution shall be Inade~ except: to' those· ' .

indivi.,d.uials jlerm.. ..i.t...t:e.d.'_ t: o"'.b...e. .

p

r

e. -

sen
. ~..

t

.

at

the"-execution',

.
)-::<

.,-~,.',:

D. .. ~ourteenDaYs l?1:'i:or, to Execut:i.on: week.

"

f ...

• .

. . ..

_.

•

.

- ...,

._

,

• 1.' The.:,Assf.s. .tanc."cO."..'.t.t~ris* sion':~ '''i'', ',J : ;1·!O'ield: Se&... icesI·sha_'I . .~.. -~,' :.-..:-:.__,. ~=:.::. ":~.-

• !' ~. ,_ ,- ..,.,-"i..,.. -:.-..."-.- :inspec.~,t:h.Q-.peathi Rou:ie?"":tn±1:'1:11:t"C'e':' t:ra-intIig:i·... t:ests- ·an'd:~·~~"

drU.J.;s and ensure "that persoD.Qe1.'" p:rocedu~es: and

'

.

'equip~eut are prepared for~he ex~cut1cin (Refer to

. . ~ "

Appendix' '5) '. ~ The, Assistant Commissioner 'shall,as~~st thE:: wardell t SA ~ecesS'at:Y1 . to' ensure- these::proC9dlir~sY ..

are- carried Ott\:':,

- ..

~ ,

The ASsistant: Warden, Harvl.and penitentiaryr shall be
responsible for obt:aining-~e.quired,peimits trom the.

Marvland Pepartment ot ~he· snvironment(Re.fer to ,

APpendix;l6) :' - .: :'-: ~':" ":: . -,... . ".. .:' .':'" .::.

.: ...

3. The;Ass1stant warde~,' MCACshall·dev~lov plans

associated with a command/operations center and contact

those necessary to staff that center. Each wil~ b~

required to develop speciaL'operating procedures for

their area of responsibil.ii:Y alld subnl1t them. to the

.,' .

ASsistant Col1Ul!i~sio!!er.l~ Fi~9.,-AA~1.c.e~ and the- ,W:~den/,

.' " -- - -:=-•.. fo:'::- review and' approval (Re'fe~ to" Appeildix~1). ,,- . '

4. The desisnated public tnformation of~icers.wiiLmeet

, wi-th. the, Governor' s: PraDs. secretary. to develop· media

procedures (Refer to sp~cial- .operating:- procedures, Uildel;

, Appendix ~8).

-~--

'

E. Sevei:l. Days PriQr to Bxecuti-on Week: 1. Non-contact visiting lIlilY b~ s,c~e~li!sd' ..Gln' a ,daily b~S'j,s~' .* • :..

a. A maxilll~ of two visits will be allowed p~~ ~ay,

not to exceed one hour each visit.

.

b . Regu.l~ :visits: wiD., be.- held between the h.ours of

. -l:O(}. p.ll'. and'T;Oo. p.m-" '.'

.

'.!

--:....;....... -;:-.

c. Attorney and clergy Visits shall be unlimitedl

-.

howeverI these: vi.sits shouId take. place between

. "

th~ hours: of- 9t~oo:.. a!. Dt"_ and:- 8:: 00· P ..It:. 'ttltleBS' ~

.: '"

, . ;-., .'. '417. '.' ,-,.' , "- approved;,a,s:,' a res~t; at:. spec1.a::I. r~est;·

~

~

. "

.Revised '!/1./9"4

.. -..
. ,

'.

.......

85/8512£184 12:27
•• ,..

418-508-2812

PAGE 89

2. ,All outgoing or i.ncoming .telep~on~ . c.all·i¢h~{l.l be' .

to . .: . -approve<l.. by Ule"Warden~ o~ his- d.es1c;p;t$.~ pt:ov~ded all . "/-~,,,~,
partie:;,. consent to rec.e.ipe 'Or the 'C;:a.ll ... Ail. parties· ~ ;~.

the: conversations shall be :i,nformed thatthilse calls ., .:' :-:'.'

lal\Y'ba subject to moni:tol:.:inq· and~recordiilr~t. ex~apt

:"--:':~;"":..

ca.lls t fl.\onitor

o or ed·• .

·:·f~:r·o·:.m..:.

.~e··inmate.t's
...:. " ." '.-.'"":,:::--"

a

t..t.o.-r.n~

ey will '''::,--

· ~

..n~o..t:-b::e:

::-..~':_",':L:-.'..:.:.;.;:;...:..~:._:.~,.;,..,.

F"... F-ive'. Days Prior t,o' EXecution.::Week.

.' 1.

The,. EXe~ll.tion. Team will. be se.lected by the· Executiott"~.

..~~~- ..
.' :-,,:'-":: ..

COJllJlander. This. squad' shall include: . :

. ' . ..,'.,:s,...

..~ ~.' . ~ ~.4'· . • . . . .

"".:.. :-:".. ...... .. .... ." -"..~:'" ..... :4.0: . '.~=-:. :~! .;::-~';_~~i.

.! :,:':": : ..., -:-~:.:.-:":. -8.,,!~ ~ J Th~' Assfsta.ntfiW<ri;de~;:..,-Maql:an!li~tenti.a~"':';t~~;'::"':-'; ~.

monitor the tei:ep.honelf' :1..11: the Dea.th House anc.t:to:,:" '.-" '. ;:.: .....

. a.ssist: in: the execut,1on process. :

.

.' . -,-wo (2.) :desic;jne:ted::·:6:a-ined o£fi-C&rs':-to o~rcite:: the-

;- .',

.Gas Chamber ARll Two ( i) designat'eQ tra.i.llec:l:

officers to -operate the LethaLInj'ection chamber.

TWo III alternates .ay be designateaat the

.discre~ion cf ens Warden.

_. .~
~

.

. -

:

..........0 ..

,

.

one' (1.)' desiqnateo: tira:1:ned: o££icer toconduet . '.; , '; .....;;i--:=:;.

recol:ci keeping.. and key- contl:O~ activities durinq:-··. : ~

the execution. .

.,- . .:::~_-::.

d. A three (3) officer escort team assigned to' escort
'!;he in.tnate. from. M. c:.A •.C'. Co the· Death House-, t:o:

conduc~ dea~kwat:ch activities, awi to move the

area,' condelUl.ed...inmat-e from the. Dea.th House·'hou$ing area

"'Co the ippr6priaeEi= e,xecutl.oD.·

depefufin~f'on:' . '.~,.

the met:hod oE .executiou..· :A£t:er the..· execution they will taka custody of the body from th~ Executibn . Team and eseorr i t to itsappropriate.des~ination.

-.':' ...
A two (2) officer tea.m~ -under the direction of ·the

.. .'~ .

Assistant: Warden,. M.C'.A,C" will be assigned 'to

.- ....

escort offie.1al w.1tnesses.

.

f. '!'he· warden., Maryl~d,peniten~i~, will des'ignate- :" . .-.;~~'?~"

any other suppo~t: staff deemed necessary by the· .

EXecution collU1tancier.

.

2.
:i.
'. .

Medical support staff for·the execution shall be designated by the Executioa Commande~.

bY"'. The JrKG'machine to be-:~ed dUriIiq.- the eXecution

• ...r . . . '4- \II ~

r,

....... ,

lethalqas' shall be inspected and calibrated.

.' .

'.

.- "

,,"

.... -.

.... -,',., '-~'-'
'".- .

. .-.-

:- .. ',

, ......

.~ .

..95/05/2004 12:27 410-588-2912

.:'

PAGE 10

. ,.5.' 7.

-Equipment t:~sts shallb~,coriduct:ed,~to .in~lude

eme~ency, qerier~~9rfphdnes:;'-and·;ariy~othe~ ~equiPll1ent to'

be utilized in theaccQmplisliiaent' <:jfth'e'e.xeClltion'

process."

. ' ....." ,;'" " ....

" , :'

The warden' shail.l flrie~ d::L sh:lft ~~luaiili~ts': and

_-,:. '"

depart:nleUe heads regaiding: ;he, eXeeu~1on: ::'only 'the :. :-:".' ::;;:-':-.

information necessarY for:t:he-safe'~ .·efficte.nt ,onera'tioti. .

of the institution 'shall.. be, 'shareCt Witb them.,' Under: no

c:;rcumstances sh'all 1:he. date; or'.t.U1e or any details of

execut:.ion he communicated to, thetn (Refer to Appendix ~

~9) •
Theiwarderi:

's~l~ r

i~~tt~~~n~ti:.n..b.-~aPi~~~~o~' t'har:

,~,

'.
'';~':;;-;~!o-

,shall be on dUty during'the period of execution ~d '

,

instruct this individu.a:1 of the duties of this position

(Refer' t:a .Ap~~nd1x ~10) ~ .....

: . ~,... :

The Assistant commis's±pnerl "Field Services, shall

conductar.'"l inspec'tion' of·tqe Death· aouse. housing unit,

witness area ~d chamber 'area.

.

8. , The- 'collUllissioner shall' idettt:.ffY6-. co 12 public .' wi;;jiesses. 'Peot:'llethat'-shoulCf"'be considered--for· .. selection may' be.' (Refer. to ~ppend.ii. ~ll): .

.... ...:..

a. ,publ'ic officials

b. Victim- family members c. Elected officiils

:-- -- .... - _." J'";. ~ __ ...
.

d. Any other-respectable citizen-of M~-yland in qood

s-.:andinq, ,that. has made,.~ _~eque-s,t;; ..in wri.t,ill9',

Media- rep~eseIIta~ve.s·

,.

.

G. Four Pays. rrior to Execution"Week.

The: Execution. commander shall. con~ct ~ meeting wi.th

all individuals who have sup€~1sory responsibilities

for activities assoCia.ted with -the execu:tion, including

those rela.ted to crowd control strategy.

.

.

.... .

....

~ .........

Z.' 'the Assistant Warde-n, Maryland Pe.tiiteutiary,. sball
check ,all outside telephone. tines in th~area.. Any

• deficiencies shall be reported for-immediate '

correctioJl.

3.

A notification list wilL be, established by tha

'

: ASSistant: Warden.z in.dividuals to be

Maryl:a.nd:.. notif'ied'

pe in

niten
tbe

tia
ev

ry-I
ent

. to or

'
s

ide ign

ntify ifican

t

~

.."."'...~

, ...............~.-:.

....
..

-~

lega~ chan- ge. T, he list shall. includ.e, at minimU1l:

.... ".

(a:)' qove1;:Dorf s:. office:

,.', '". ,'_

6/'t '{bJ -Secre~a.x:y ~f. P.:uhlie. 5afa~ and C$ectional.
Rarlsed. 4/1/94

k.-": •.

.. ~
. . ~."

, ,

;~ :

Hl. OTI-ER FACSIMILE 01 18156429399

MaY~ ew; 2004 03: 49PN
'l'(lR tl:Ic:D . : J3Et«:TT&LAl.Lffi.LLP
. YO..R FAX Kl. : 301?201577

May_ 06 03: 46PM 03'11

SHD

10

OK

sa:.ecr lD ~ IFF IffiRT, .~. 'f'ENj' .U04 SET.'

lI-EN

i:J:1:"'BY. USlKi· Jll.'i1)UL· ..

f'(R FAX ADU'=NTOOE ASSISTt:K:E.·~.oiL·l~AX· (435-7329).

. ~

• • 0'-

. , :.";::..': ..

:.: :.

05/95/2884 12:27 .'

- _"_"~"_~~
J

~ . . . . . . __ . . . . . . 0'

4HI-58S-2912

....... ..-.;:., -~' ....::. -"' ~ ,....... ~.,';.~,

PAGE 11

of' se~~ces,... . . " '
.' lei' .Coin.Di.1ss1one;r: ccrre<:tibtt"

Jd) ~arden .·of ·Marlle.ri4'pen~tentia'ry

;Cel Attorr}sy Generid·,r(:bf£;ce .....

. ......
·h . The:-.'·inalate. will' b~ ,re~~1ited' to1iipecify' fUneral.

'- .. ~." .l." ..

··a.rrarigemellt*~~·;:':' This'· Wilx.' be.~: o}Jt1l1~ed' ,by(:tlie-o-as~..:r9r,,-eci" .. - :. _"..i--:-- .

ChaplUn;'and submitted t:o.,th.e.'Wardeu,.s 'Office in

,,'"

: writ'ing- (Refer. to .A,ppenc:ti:x:'" t.t2:) ."

..

.. ~;~ ;

........ .('

..

.. ~.-

.. : t.' .. "'~"::" ... d,

5 . ,'J.'he EXecut1otl'l'.eam. shalt: ~Qnduct .a,;drlll 'in accordance.

.with ~J)eratinq pt'ocedures:iA Appendix :1.3, to ' .

. ..

. .. . . ... :...,. demons1:I:a:ce:;: their .readiness; to the:: Exeriution Commandez:•. -:-::--.. :;.::,_.,

- -:'<r''''':r1;'': ~~.-;~ 'l'ae:.-·ar±l;I~:sha1i:... inC'ltide-~l'J:~mpr. :i::Ir-'tba=.:e.xeC:urion,:, .•:,::"'::':";-; ::-':f..-i-.;~

... process· ',ea.ch. '

e'n,d''d,em" onStrat.e,

the

time

it:.

takes

to

com- ol.ete.·

..'.'

".-

~

.. 6._: .- '1!1:Ie: Ass.istant commis-sioner.~:~ fi~d S~rV!ce$ t. •shal~

inspect the command/operations center/as w~ll as the

'Death Sous~ honsing wiit, witness area arid cham,bE!r

area.

. ,

, .

'

E, Three Days prior to EXecution Week.

. 1.. Th~sxecution.commande~·shal~·des~gnate a custoay

supervisor to handca.rry a se~ledaI!.velope. marked

or. 'execution' pe·rsonal. and confldentia.~ couta:i.ning: ..iuform.ati,on. as. t:.o... ,

-::ha-' da-ce and time-'

io': . ". -' .: .... - '. -

........ -.

. '

.

a. The Governor's' office ..

•i::.. .'l'he- SecretL.-y. of Public.: safaty and Correct:.i.onal

',set'Vice.s

c. . The- Commis~ioner of Corre81!ion

2.. 'The: Execution. Commander sha11. inspect ·the- Death House
. houSing unit!, witne.sS! ~ea: and ~e-c:u.tion Ue!.S I and
ad.vise- the- Commissione:r 'of:' h. is fi' ndi. ngs'.. '.

.3. official witnesses shall be notified of their .selection

and will be required. to c;oQtplete <i. witn~sS'a91='eeinent

(Refer to Appendix 115) .....

' ,

. .,
4:,.' .' w,1.tness:- aP2~1cants not: 'ss'lected: 'wil:l De- notified '.' "

.:'. ;p......" ..... ~~ z·

accordingly (Refer' to- APP~d.iX . 1:'16) : . , .'

:- ..
'.'
'Revised 4/1:/94..
"
.' . ... ,;':.--. "-.. . ~ " -:.:.--.
~~!' ~~.. "--~ •• -

~ - . .. . .. .'.:':. ~

,
"..

'.

',' . . . . -...: ~ .. .
..

1. t,0'

-.

. ..~,

.

. .1

",
. :. ... ...:.... ~...... .

..65/05/2664 12:27

41fl-5tlS-2012

- ---- _ --~ ..... ..

........ ---~---.-.-...............

. . .. -'-~" ~-

'

PiJaLIC ~

PN£. 12

I. Two Days pri.or to. Execution. WeelC

.- ""f. ~ •

. -

1. A tra.ininq e5c~~cis~ldrll1will'be conduc·te.d.':· inClud~h~'" ~ - ., "

a Orillof' the eltecu.tion, and all related operational '.

proc·edure.s : . . . .

.

. - ..

-. .' . oversee-the:"t.t:a.fnin:q·:: •

• '

<

• •

:

".

: -

' •••

~:

•

, •

~

•

••

'.

.~.

-,-··!··2~~·· :T1i~-Exe'cutlou Coilma,nder'shill~

~ ' ! - '..

• . '. :-:-

.. '. "...•.• -

~ :. ... ..' ~ ....:..:(.. ..~~.~~.- ..
:'-':.7Z~:6': '':'!.~~'.~ ,::.:_.~-:.:.

. . - exercise/dr!l~ .~d ~spe.C1:. th~ ~Death ·~tJ.se .housing. 1.1Ilit, '~.: :. _. '-;-....::

wi.tness. a.rea. i;!.n",.exe,c:m'tion ·.areas: and: .advis~ th~: commi.ssI6iier.:: :-.;..,~.. ,. ::

of. his'. findings. ., ...'.

. ~ ,.'-

- . .' . . i·· ....· ,. : ....:,.

•. ........ : .,' - ., ....- '.;

. 3. Th~ ASsi~t~~~a~d~ri:>~iaticL l!enitenti~ri, ~sh~i ·~~st::..~:~~~:'.

.

. all telephones ·1n~the·-!)ei:·th:Ho1ise::.-:.~··.~·.:~· !-::,~••::.-:s.'~" ;--=::::.-:-'>:-.-'..-:-::~·::7.·.'..71~.·

•'"::-::":' 4.L."~."!':.:::"'''''. ~ •:.:-".~\~7~~:t.,:"-:f~"';'''·~: -~ ..,.-=~;.~.:~>·~.::,·~--:::t';'~'~#~~=:'::~",:~··~:.7"- ~~.::.:. v , -. tr~;~.

'. 4;', . Equipment' tests s)J.a!l be conducted. i

-. .

....

,"

5. The' Warden- s~a11 ne'· br(~£ed:'af" the' rasultj:;:of;: Items !1,

. "3,-'and 4;' t.n order t:haf::a:ll: defici.enci-eS"" rOmia::' can: ·be"

corrected immediately\',

.. ~ . : .:'

;;. one Day Prior to ~cl,1tion. .

1. The Warden·siiall personally cast. ail telep~one$.l.n the

Death House and' bri'ef 'the- Execution COQUllander:.

I ~

•

..

..

•

z. An inspection will be 'conducted of.ali ~afety .

e.qUipJllent.

....".t

The witness st:.a~f!.ng.area:·will. be. identified by "the

tin fa: tocated'.: Asais~ant Comn1ssione~i, Field serv-ices •.

...

: .

........... .'.

• ~ ~ '4'.: .... 'Th~' witness ~ ~d sr. 'a~~a:;' ~h±ch.

'. . au,' the: ·~irst·

fl.oor of· .the. Maryland: Peni.tentiar-f Hospital, shall De .

set.. up·by·t;he Assis.tant warden, M.e.A.C.

.

.to 5. Parsonnel .as.s·i9l1ed.· th~ execution. team; sba-ll inspec'C: and,1:2st all lIledical related-eq1l1pmeJl1: and sublllit; a.' report of the1.r £ind.in.gs to the Execution cOmmande~.

6.- FUneral orbody'disposLtion arrangement~ are: confi~ed

'by the Assistant: Warden, Maryland.' ?eni'tentiary (ltefer

to A.,opendix 1'17).

. .

.-

.

1. ~he Execution Co~ander may conduct separate s~CUrity ..

hriefings, to include th~'Exeeution Team, all.support

. Peraonnel/d~si9hated. Division. of. Cor;x:~tion.. .

.tfeadqtia.ct.er.' s.. personI\el:',.--a.t1d'. any: other,personnel deeilled~: ....;:, ..~..~.:.: '

n¢cessary (Refer to ~Appendl.lt ·*t9'). .

.

...

'.~

.. -......

....

.- ..

- - 0 . . . . . . ;
... -:....... ....

. '. "

r ,... : "_

. ' 0,..
. -.......... "..

85/65/20e4 ·12:27
."

418-588-2812

PlJ6lIC DEFENDER

PAGE 13

.8',

.1he Ass'ist
estah~ish

an:t W'ardt!n 4 M c:oinmuntcattc:m

artland lines

'

, Pen witb

iten
the

tiary. Gover

s n6

h r:

al ' S

l

Office' and· sUbti;it: a:,W"ritt:enbr1erinq \:0 t'.he Warden

(Refer: to Appe.tidilc:· il a ) .

. :'9'::-';-- . -.Th~'·-E~~~tf~~;:-~6uande~':-shitii ~'cond~e't"-an::'inspec:ti~n ~~-"':~:~ ,':,~; :';".

. " 'If ••

, .the De~th ,House ~ou.sing- unit:; 'witness areal and chatuber

. ;. area. a. O

.

:

•

•

;..~ 0" _ . ; - . :..

...

..r •

-. : ••:...... : .'

10. .All; of the inmat&'.5': personal. proper.ty, fii.th. the, '-.

. ,

elC(:!apt:ion o,f legal. lIiataria:l, shall he:· inventoried. by'

'.

• - _.' :,,;. ", . s1::.rl1;' 1.n.. the·p.resen<:e, of' '1:11e- .inma:t:e:;:=' 't'he.:.:inml!l:te··shalI.: -:.,.. ::,..#~:,,:.:.

me _., " ........ '1 :"~_:-~:~":"~~;" :"=±dedgna.:1:'&/-,:,hr wrt.t:tng';--wtIar:d±SpaS'±tr±OiIi-±~;heelnade.C-~':":==:-:-~~~:,

.

' of this' property..:' 'Propercy shall' be.-.-seal"ed· in'

':9rege~Ce of·the inma1:e and stored 'in the designat:ed

.. :.:. .....
'K.

. ' area unt:il.d.ispos1tion is made. .' .' '. .

" . '," ". -" ......

.. _. ....; ".. ," :~...:..'. '''. : ....... :~ .~ ...: ..~ ......:- ... '-" .... =..::;:......: ...'"~:~ .... ~ ..

,Eiqht·

!lours-

Priot'·

to
.)

.the:D~.4i. J11ated-.

Exec:ut:ion:

T~e

.

.... " ".l.:

J"

.- 00:" '".

.,,,~

1. '!!h.e Execution cOlll1lander shall me..1;:s an inspec:::1on of the Dea'tA Eou.se. housin~ a~e2., wi1::nes!' C!l"'aa and chamber area.

cne 2.. ' Tha: ASS.t,s."i:.an.t:.,war.den:,. MCAC., shall ;s~1.ish, a. COIUliald/

Opera~ion~ center'to be located at

Maryland: '

Penitentiary Eospital in the adminis~rative area

located on :::he east. end of the se(:!ond floor. 'The

Cen1;:er shall be 'equipped with telephones ana

.

institutional tadiosin order tha~ p~ope= c~mmunica~ion

.. . - - can be m.ai.."'lt.ained._ The Comm.and/ope!."ation.s Can':e::- shall _.:- -":- ...... ,-be. staf~ed, :!.n' ac:c:ot-di.u:c-ti with 'Appendix '~7 ~ . .. "

.

,

This command cet!.ter shall be responsible :for the'

operatio~,and no~i~orinq ~~,th& ins~itut:ion d~~~ th~

pe::('iQd, ~ ~ecUt1oU'. an4.,foi: coo1:'d.ina:d.on. Wi.th.: :the-

~~cll'tion Commander, W~den ana"" supervisors .in the

Death Housa.

. .. !.~
'. _.:,
. '" ~ ....
"

rnstitutional ?Graonnel in the Command/ope~ation~

Center- sha:ll respond- to' ehe needs' of the. insti~tioII.

Non~instit~:::ional personneL $ay be requested to perfo~

support services. if needed, in appropriate ar.eas of

expertise.

-

......

~... ::.-

"

_;.:. . . . 3.' _'rt1e: only s'ta:ff.. permitted i.n. the Death.. Kouse, hou.::.-iil.g, . .. ,,'bareea.:.;' wi'tho. ut ap.p. rov:al". ,of. 't:h,e:.'...!:xecuti'on. :.. c.omaande.t::" "-.'sb'.-a:l.'l.

, ~~4:~:
,

a. ·commissioner of COrr&ct1on

aerts.~'~~~/~' "~J~'" . . b _. .··Wat:den" ,Maryland::' peniten.tiary -: .. ,'.' . , .' e-:, 'ASsistant Wardet;:, Maql.and: P~t~ary' .. . •

"

, ,..........-
'-

'. _ ,', l -.

...

..' " ~

.

, ~_~~ _

" ••~; .. '''~::;"_•• ,_.

. ;"
: • ..,11 . . . .

. 05/6512004 12: 27
.-'

41£1-508-2912

PUBLIC .llEFENl':ER

pA(t: 14
...

I ............. -: ~ ... .....
- ,; . .... .

_ d. c;b.,ief ~f sec::ud.ty, Mariland Penitent:i~

e. Chapra,in'

.

,'.

Qeath wa~ch'S~pervis~

g. 9f-fic'ers assigned' 1:.0 "Dost _ ~.

.,

.. ".

n . .r..ssist'aJ1t CcUissioner t Field serVic.es' ~. ' . '-: ;-'~. -.":.. ";':'"

. ,-_'. L _: , Desi.gnated:ll1autenancQ. ·t)etsolineL":'':''rl..;.;;t?;~ -:~ ::..;.~~~-:: ....;~ ,.::-.:::.;~ -:-.

..T' :mtI~t'.e to's-- Al:tornay

- .' . .•. .: .. --,.....,.--.- ' ..:' - . ,.-...:... -'~.~~".I'~ -~"-. - •••.._ ...~",:Ir:'~" :-:'-.:'":~'.1--,~:d.;-:-J--

Desigriated medical... versorinel ..... - . . .

. .-., .

. . n:> .._ . I:. . -- . . Execution' Tea.- ..:-' - -.-', . . ._ .'~~~l

~

~

-.~,:~~~ 4.~~ ~"'''''~!@!iJ.:~-''!!'''f::''

Six Sours- Prior' ~'clle' D~±-gnato:rd':

,"-"'~'~"'-:'

1.

2. The. Psycnologi.st:, Chaplain and mea.ical personnelsh.all

respond upon. request·.

.

.

'!'he· Zxecu:t:1on ?ecorrler's ¢'::':-!c1al record-.snall be.. .1nt~ia'Cad_· .....-..~.. ~. ". .. :........._:~. }:' .. ,.... :-....."'.~: ..: - ~ .-.~':.. "".-'~ ..-:": .:~"~": . "':r.:·: .-- •

.-

1.. ~ .1.'he 1issl.S'CaD.t wardenl !t.C-.A.C; I ~h&ll ~~n~ac~' ,all .' ~
official:- witnssses,. ins1:ruct:~ -chell 1:'0- l:ep'drt: to Q;:',' .'

de£iqnat:e~ loca'Cion at, a specific time, where t:hey will

'be scre.ened and aSS.lgned, special passes for. adlllission

·to. the Maryland. Psn1t.ent:iLpY.

, ..

At"a 'time: 'direct=!d: by 'th& !!!x~cution C9-an&~, .the.
witness Esco~t·Te.an shall proceed'to the witness, st:aqinq location and transport ~e witnesses'~~ tha
wai.ting area at .the Maryland Eeniten.tiuy·

shal~ !'lcc::om.Pal1Y' this'

•

remain' de.ta.::U. andes-cart. t:h.e- witnesses:- on: behalf: .of:- t:he-
.. Divi!p..oll'::'of.: Qu:rec:tlon;~ .'l'he-. wi.ti:u~ssem-:· s:ttan:.

.
in: '.

:: the: ~i.tness:£Waiti.D:g:.: a-rsa(untll 'thE!!:-.~o:t: executilXl·•.. '-

ReVise.a 4/i/9~·

-,

.'.

.- -.....; ..".:.".

,.... '-r

"

..05/05/200412:27

416-508-2012

..
PAGE 15

3'~' . 'l'h~ 'des£91l~ted ,s'Witchboa.i.:d op~rator' shall ~report for

duty. ,and remain oadu~ ·untiLorderedrelleved. This

·illdividual. 'sha-ll take.:, speciai' care·to :.a's'sure'th.at a11

__ . .. '. ' • .; '::;.; o. ".' -:. c~l~_are·~·rec~i.vet.i: and screened ,in a~~9tdJ4t¢e: !'1~b p.re~·

t.::

<" -.--: -~ .. , ' : - ,,: es~abI1~bed::-iiJ.struct1-ons. (Re~er. 'to~ell~iX:: 11C1)

--:-'~:-::::"',

,. '~~ ,:-.. '1"190, ~'~si,lief~';ib:e:. 'Destgn,ted- tx6~t.1O~~'!rbae~:"'~::"- '., , .. " :;:.,

. :' '. ,:' '1'••. oihe,·~eCutio~,~~~ ~il1"re~tt to, ih~~':~'~~~ions;',

.. ':.,

and .inspe.ct the... eqtt1pme:n.t

advise, 1:be., Ex~"ctiti¢n.' .

',:

: ',_ ::,. co~deJ;'..when:·, they :a.-re. prepared.: tq:-.pegftr,::l;ne":·::,,, '': -,: ,;';-" . ::::..::,;.¥.~~

'. :~..s::-~-:t;:~ :;"-c'I:=;;"eXe(::ution-~~"'l'lief ~ec:Qt:1:Qg Coinlrana~L7~~t1i~·",:,:,:,,",:,,~'

, ,.'

: . ~e.c.tit'ion proc..e. .ss

fu' accQrdance with ,..

Appendix

~.13.• '.

.

. ,:

' .

one:: •"

_~

I

•

:2.. "~.

-.

,Ae'xic.e:.ie'dt::im.~dh~os.uirgnpa:tCeido.rb-,yt-Q-t·heeX.e<xiXu18:e:LUo.nt",i.:oDth. ec.oEaxaencdu'eCr'.io,Dn

o

t:
.

to.

.,'

,'collt1ltand.er'shall. go T;.O'.the .De-atb:; House :houS"ing Unit:- and:.

inform the irunat:e of che executioll.

3. The. as.igned· chaplain lIlay re.m.ain 'in this area if requeste,d by t:he. inmate..

• WoO

- ; . . ..

.. ... '

..

•

The. iDlltate: sha:ll not be- allowed to. make, or receive
. calls unle~s. authorized by the wa~den.

" .

. ;.

.. '.....

-. . .,..,. .: .
Re.vi,sed. 4:/1/9'"

.......
~-l~ /" " .

.'. .... .... ;.

..~ jlf...

, '" , .' .. ~.' I

.

.. , - ...

_ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - '" .........,..·....i:-..~ ._......... ~...~..~..i~;.:~....:.....·.._...:.~: ~

. . . . . . . . . . ~. -:

... _ .. ' ..........-

............ ".

o~ .. 0
.. .. -coo; •

~,,~

.......

_

---_._.._._--_.. _- .._--_.. _-_...._----._----------------_._--_._.._---------------- - - - -

...65/85/2664 12:27 4113-5138-2912

PUBLIC~.
.'

PAGE 16

anq ){aiutenenc:e

~Bexre~ctfuo~no.n ~Pf'io~.dtewd.t.t,re:sr.i.::';..'~:~'~.:~.:'~.'~;,~er' ':,.<. ',"-,.:::::.:,;.

A.

. . .

S.tate'

()f;' Marty~d"

. "': :~.

-

,~;~.

,.:'

.. ' .':' ,:' "." .'~ .

.

'~.:!"••:.,

. , ,....,.-.

.-

-

'

.•.·fTohlel. <elcwiu=t·P~t

ll ,

t"m.~t,,'

m"a'-1":"""~.ria;l--G: .,'a,z,i;d::-'rc..:~"h"~,;,~•.~,$,,,-"fr.'r.r"¥::"~"~'.~~~'."''"~'s,....-

..~:....,,;.,~.'O~";'.""'/.-~:~~"

.'

,'.

SOc{j,UDl.pe~tathol:·50a ~q.,

",
W/d:llUe!le.··(c.r-:l:

15

Pavu!on, 10' mq. ampules {c.r.}

. 1=

Potassium Chloride, -'. ampul,es: (C~:t~}

LQ mj,;J.e<tuiv •.

...; :

.......... . ..

10

Syrinqe-, 60 Cc

~':"''''7 ~' •
. ... ......
~--.. -.~-..

10

Needle, 18 ga. straight

- - - - " "-"0:::-:' 'a" , ...... Ang1Qcach, 20 guage/ "l: l/Z"

IS

Anqiocath, la guaqe, 1 1/4-

, ' .:. '. :- : -.-:-;- ...',,;.' ;, .-:.r '_.

._-- ~giocath, L& guaga,:~ l/Z •.

. "

8,

Angio<?ath, 15gUaq&, 1 1/2".

10

4-

.' . Iiact'ated Ringers, IV' Bag., 1.,-000 cc

-.

"
-. '. :.. \," "''\:

.- - ....

. . . . '"1. . . .
':--. "'. ~ . ~-

.....

6

IV administration sets

. . ~ ... ..:. .....
Pressure 1IliusiOlt' bags;

&.. 6. -.

. 3-leadIV.extension sets

". ....

.~ -:- '..

.r.Y:!. ne~die,. lOCks: ..

w'

~"'_'. . . :*...

_ ..

." . ...,
. ....

"
.:;~:av:_e<..l.~:.,_:~.i:. ~.::.L::~> ....~j.-;:2~~.

l..oo..J;:.:...,.. ~·~.;..·r. ", .. -,,,,,, __~ _

....... .. . : :-..-

• W.'''_ ".. "'.~

.. , :;;"'2·~

.... '".
r. .. _.:" ..
. . -. .~ ....... ~ JIII..:.,;' ......'"
'" :- .:..
.. : .....

65/05/2064 12=27 418-5eS-2012

PUiLIC ~'
"

PAEE 17

-Mi.l:rl.mu1!l iUIIOJmt Hatetialg - -

1 .-' .-- .-~: 1.. .-

_. , SteIlo~cope· . ..... -......... . Bl~d-'·~rQssure. cuff

,;....

1

Alcohol
-'

prap.s-~ - box

. 1 :.. '. 4 .X. 4' qauze: .pads ,box.

-. . /Ac.t.uaI

--. .

.-
.

.
. ~

.

.

..
....

. ,

. 4--

~

-.. l'
1
1 so

" .. ·t.·

- "'f" ..... _:

•

4.
. - .." - 1.

Tourniquet..
.' ,
I.V, <:!Ut down set, Sterile Gloves, r4, box sue sUla!l Gloves, P2.. bO!C size medi.um. Gloves t P2. box size large . SUrqi,cal mask.s (2: box.)

Eye protectorSf

'Trainihq ar.aw:lth attachmeats

(see.. inventory)

. _ _.

I.V. poles

r..-" .-
..

- - - - ."-...-..

--

:. ...

.... _---

Mayo instrument. s.tands-

1

Small sharps, Disposal Box

1

Large Sharps 0 isposal Box

. ' ,

B. Suggested perso~tU. for Operations

:

1. .crh& cemm:is ioner' s'hall: designate 'a-: persoDtO' be the

... -: ..

t j . "Sxe.C'I11:UioIr
o£ a.l.l aeti.

cojman vi.tiu

de re

l :I t' l.a

who
tea:

t

w o'

ill b
the-

eex...~... ~ciomomua.n·d.

. ~

iJ.'h~ Warden" .- Maryland;.., Penl.tetn:i:ary. 'shall he:.. - ~ .

tJxe;.·asststant:' 1:0; the. ~J:' -of ·the . . :... :..t..

4 . .4 . . . .

. . . .- ..

exeCution: proCess-.

. . . .'

"-

'.23O''...J~:!~,.

.. -I

".:" -.,- ..

.. ~ ...~:- ....... ,J _~... • "'::A •

..e5/e5l2ee~ 12:27

411:1-508-2812

PUBLIC~

PAEE. . 18

2. ·1 'l'4re~.persons shall he d:etailedas-: :piimaryOpEn:at:orS";of: .' :"-.;- '.

'ot ..'_. the Lethal Injection .Ch~er~ ...on;f!t; .shall': be ."detail,e<i:. as: ". : .- .
the ,Ole of. chao InjectiQ:il.·T9a.l!l,:uIiq.e~.thec:fi.rection
t:.he ExeeutioncOJamande.r. TheOrcs}iould::handle.' thE:\-. -. '. :-. ':' .
:..orderi'nq of' all eqtlipmen1:', dr'a.gs-.a.tl.q. $upplies'I-.~&.w~ii~_~~..;:"_~

. as' the preparation.. of" a~l' sYt"inqes-'as~iieces"sary.:·t:O:::i=.:::: :;:=:.:._::-.~.;,.

cury-. out the. .execu'tion by lethdin.jec.tlon.. .....___.... .:' " ..::... .

,. •

. .. ~.-:: .. -.... - ~ ......;::-_"::-:::::v:-::::..~,..:~ .. "":'::= - - - ...:..~. -....:;;;...:.;..... .

s- . .. . .: -: ;._. . .. The .OIC;. or::·.h:ts- desigri~~,' sh~lr prel'a·tii:th~m;··s~~:..~~,·.-.:::;::"7~;
insert the anqi'ocath into. the.: vein: of: .the- iD.JItat&i

. riqh~ and:· left ans. and. initiate. the. rlOW:·qf~..lac.tat.e~.·._:..:.. _~~~-::

. -lt:h"ei:n::qEexres;c.uatitb'·na::·;:.s'Cl.bomwm:-arnadt&ar'.'!.(:"t'o;:·.·.k-e"~-"~,:-:':•~. '"~,.... l. ~;:.;.c;;i-S:iE;Y~'~·c..tre.c. :r-..,*..i....~..:.:=:.•;-:~:~..,:··~··~·-.~..:;t;:.,...

... • ..

.... ~ .

:.

~ .. "' ••""'._- -=-.. ';'".

.. '~~"~";:""::' ... 1It

" Tlie. &xecutto·u:ccimmaude.r·sha.ll. des1~te. which memi,er ~f

the. :rD.ject:ion 'raUl wi.ll ·a.i:imilIis't~r·the; l&thal.·dose.cf

sodimr Pett1:Othal·,.the:· vavulon.:.attd;:;the:- Potassium::-" .:':'" .....: ~

Chloride; w clampSj and

hich 'member- Will which member wi

a ll

cctoivmamteu:ntihcea.t..e.

flowwith

c;ontrol.
~he

S'xecution' cotllmander usiIig predetermin,ed signals.

3 •.

. onti ac:id.itional officer shaul.d be.d.esi9'1lateti as the
chC!lllber Recorder". 'I'his:'Qffice:r'sh'alr'record' all. .
acti:v1ties conducts.d dw:ui ;:he. -pra. an,d.. pose-ex:ec!lti.on I

.

- . . ~' ';". ......

as well as the e:reeution' itself. :fa. shalL also

function :.s tile !<e.y Control Officer for 'all Death

..

ChaJllbEI.t' keys.

o!,. one· Assi.stan.t Commander, who shall, conc.llc~ all.

. '.. ·!n.sDect:ions;<i: .testiS. and drills· arid may. act: as' the

..

co_and-e±- . . - "ExeCution

dui:'i'n<i. 't:liev eXe~:ti:on: proce·ss-:'. .

- - ..... ..... """",.....#.':'..

as The.. Exec.ut1on COtmnander w.1ll. ins.'truct the witnesses:

~o the.proce~d1ngs and will direct the. warden to escort

then. 1D.to ·And out of the.. Wi.tness rooUl.:.· " ' -

.

5. one AsGi~tant warden t wil~ m~ttor th~. ~el~~hone~ and.
advise the Execution commander concerning. any last

minute change.s in the le-qat authority to conduct the.·

execution... .

"'._

•

...t ••",.

• _ ~, . . . .

6. One Security Chief and t"lIfo·'Death. Watch: Office.rs will

monitor the inmate from the time of placeaent in tha

wDeial.lthbHeoUreSsepounn.stiiblln~lafcoerm-ePnhty· sinicatlheplaD.ceeamthe

chaJDber. nt of the

They.

inmate- in: the Dea~ chamber' and for disposit:l,on. of the

: ~body: after it: is. _removed~:. " ; . , .

. .. ',. '.

, ..

":.

:

7 •. one. Medical Doctor who will. be. responsible for il

. ..

exam1naeioQ;,. of. the :i.ruaat:e.£or. the purpose. of. "

- p'ron~rmcing:' death: 'a£ter: the- execution and: inforiD.ing·· the.

. E:x£:c. :utfO. ll' COlll1Jl'ander..·..

..
:

··

..:~....';~...: ':':-""

.....
.,; ... ~:

,:.-~...~.;......:

.

.
.

.

.
:

-': " ... ...

Revised 4I.i/fJ.4r

).'

, .' ....-.. ~;::( ..

,... ~..:.:'fi:..;.::~ J~. _j.~~. W:i~; :...... :~ ~". -::-~-:_

• 2,4' /

. . ~~/:.l7:.·
-.... . . ....... .

...... : .. - ......

. '.
-." ,,-

65/05/2804 12:27 418-568-2012

PAGE 19

-

. s. . TWo M~ntt;n~nee O~iicers- wiil. stand by for the· purpose

. o.fmd.lnq any ~a.$tlainut:e.' repa:lrs or. adjustments to

equipmen1: ()r~t"aciiitie..s.relatedto·the execution

procesS'.:, :'",; :;~..;. '

",

'

-. '

• •"

. ":'" .~: 4 :~••",::.::. .-'",!=_~_~~; ....

'.

..~.~: . . _... !. " ' .

~ : . __ .....

, prepar.at~Qn:, fox; 'opera:t1ons::of: 'the ~th~ J:nj.ec.tl:on:-.C1:i.aDlber-· .---:::::::::..

:. 1:.: FOur"(~)"' ~Y$ p7;iOl: t:o~,an1:f~'iP~~ci'Us~'ai:~ie::~Mcyt1on: .' ..

.

.

J:nyentott

attd

-

E

. g

i

I

i

p
'

m

e

g

s

'Check

a. . Metabe~' (if the' inj ection

wlll..~ conducted-,_

. '
teu

shalL: eotidu~'t:

an

.

. '~: . -. . ...: equipm.ent; chedt.of: al.\. l1a~!.a-l-~n~~e.S'saI:'$.·. to.~ ....:.:..:.. '''::: '"

r:iS:. • 7·-';'"!~":":"':';:':'

7.:"-:'~-.:·;..:.=pet:..£.. <?m;~ex..e..<...:..u..ti.on..;·-~_.. ..

;-:-::l.~.:~:::

.' ....

.-

:~:~~ .':.:,:,,:~,,:::~~,.~.~~.~,

The.inven~oryshall·be oonducted'not ~ore than

. "

- - . ' .- . .ni. n.e...".'t..Y..."'~L~

(96)
..

h

o

u .

rs ..

.'Or_i..o. -t..:.:.....t.. o.....t.h...e...:......e..x..

e
~

c

ut
..

io
..

n

.

.

.

c.··· An·.inventorY' ~b.~~k i:i.~t. s:hsii'~-;;~~p.l;t;adi- dated,

and init1alad by .the ,injec:i~n tea. (A copy of the

checklist .is atta.ch~d. rtyS', marked "CII" in t.he

checx column shall b.e carried i~ by the !~jec~ion

,-team on the ,6ay 'of the ~ecution.)
,

.' d.

Quantities of i-eeUliS' in lock·ad. injection room shall

b~ at least ~gse'indicatad in ·the l~ft column ot

the checkl.ist. .

. .

.......- . ~ ..

.. e·. ~ . ExpJ.ration and/or sterilization: dates -of' all

, applicable items shall be cheeked on ea.ch

. 1ndi.vidual ite!ll. .";.. ' ...:......... . ....:. :~.. -:- . :,,:.:. :"'::'7.-:::~ . .." -' ....._.

. ...~ . - ......_...... .. ~-;--:... .~." 4.:.=... -.-i.- ~ ...:.-. '.: ':_': .

1) " Outdated' i t~s ..c'.i: e ., tactatad, d.nge.r:s baqs)

. 'shall be replaced inm\edi.ately.

:..... -

..

,

,

-.

.

.
.

.

;-.";0'"..:

2) On: th~ day of the execution:; ·m.en\1;lers. of· 'the

injection. team sha-Y.-.£Ult:6r the; injection rooar

at least two (2) hours prior to the, scheduled

tiae of.' the- execution. 'rhe.y sha-ll

.... illlJltediataly- re-invent:.ory· th~; s.upplies..· arui..
eqUiplIent to' ensure· chat alL i,s. i.n~ ", '.. ~'.-.'

. _......-
... !. ..
~~."'oIL_

~ead1ness.

.

#

,... "
...... :", ..

Not less than twentY-four, {24} hours priQr anticipated

use the naces:sary drugs·.shall be ob~aine.d. ' .
.

.

a.

,

sDcuhreindg1:I: ltehaedaa·fttee-ronoroann.:

immediately: proceedinq..1;he.
execution by lathal.. :" . . :" ,

/: L.·· '. ,

inj action., a. member of the inj ectioa team' shall

obtain. the: necessary agents (drug'S). .

. ........ " ' .

- .. '. .-' .....-. . .....

.. _..

~'''' .. -:...;.,;. ... --

. ... . ~ .... :" ........:;~. ............... . ...., :...~ ....

....... ;...
.."" :.. . ~

. ...... -

I·' '. -.,;;'..-...

05/85/2804 12:27

PUBLIC DEFENDER

PtG.:. 26

.... .., .....

b. when, the drugs have beEm issued, and quant:ities

,"-

vl'!ri.ft.4~ .' t:nel" ,shall' he placed. in. thJ!Iia1:bal." . ;... :. :.

-_<.,' . :'. , Injec'I!ioti DrUg :.80X, ,and t:he box sealed. wi1:h a non- ".: " .
. reusab~e/'seqUentially tiumber~q, lOckinq-:-tYPe s.eal '" ..

and cC;~dl.O~k:..~ ,

.~.. :::..: __~"_~...:".~~~'. ~",~;;, ......-;;~:~~~~.

c', . A':IIlei!UJe..t' of 'tlie. injection,. t:eall" shall. maintain '. ".. '" .::.... : :

persc:inall phys1.cal CuEtt:od.y-:of."the::sealed:: drtiq.··il~x~·-·!:=~::

un.t:1~ ·suc):l. ..t:i1Iie asc.:Lt:- 1.s. opened: :fo:t;"·__u.fi~C!.lldlQJ:7 for' '~;'i:._..it:"~".

retu1:.tt·:l£ .1'loe:.used. .

. ' ..;~ "':' ':::.' " ~ ·_·3:;-=:::.1!:::-

,. . .-_..- "'=_:: .' .n..~~;.::;~c~ ,~~:~~=~.;j~}~~::~:~. ... _',' a.. At. ·lea$t-. nine.ty (90) ·minut:as.:pr:ror to the . ' ......,.~....... ".... ~

scheduled sxe.CUt:!Oll, tile injec~ion taam shall· be po~it:ioned. in the Ls·t:hal ~jec;:ion Cb.atnb~t:· roe. .
. .

.h. The·atc:.

~j shall complete a 9ra-~ecut:icn L~v~ntor! anc
~~ipment ch~ck; an6

2 ). prc!para the- IV. sat:-up'-': ....._. .. . ' '-'.. c. Th~ .1 /'000. ml' baq- of.' ,::i.actat:acl. r~qer-s- :sO'ltu:.-i~~ w:1.1~
.be opeiled ~d ·inspe<ct:ad.. The ~dm.in.ist.r!.t:icn sat:

.
... ':.-:..;'

will be opened and ~he flow eQnt:ral valve moved Co

the· top-and' crosed of::_ The: 'spike' or·the .:... . ...... .

ot adm1nist::;:,ac:t.on se-c ifillbE! 'tllacad; in th.e·~ort

''' ..

:"f. ' ..

. . . 'the' .IV baq anti sacur~d Wi;h-'io! 't,t*s:t ..~ . Fill. the. . . ". _: ..~...,. ~.:;~ .
. '.~~;. -:~... :.. ,'.:~ tirti:t·-chaJdler to.'haIf.:-':ftilr.:bY: a1:pieezinq::·the-· . "':' .,:...'

~e:t'. .

.

:: ...... '. ' .

.a..ttach. th.a needle. lock deV:i;ce::' tao -the. tot), JIlOSt. tt y...

sit:e:: (c-losest to. th.e: J..;T bag) a.ud ·sacu.ra~ " A't:t:~ch&d:

.:-:'.

the- tlu'ee (3) lead ext:9'S'iQn. to' th.. needle. lock: .

.'

and secure. Attach the·zo n ~~t:.nsion set: to the

e.nd of the. administration set and tape' the

connection.

.

.. '~': ".1-::" ••

.' ."~""f":~:';~

s. .S,tart th~ flow of' rv fluid un:cil- all the air is aut of- the- set-up. ?lace 1:he :ur pressur~ infUSer

avet' the IV baq and iafli.t5 un-:il the qrs:~n !in~

is' observed.

. ..

.

f .. ' .Mark 1:he three., ports-' of. :th~ th~ee- lead. eXtw!qn..

····as follows; Port 1"1;.' .Port" t2" and:- Port 1:-3. close

all three flow clamps on the thre.e lead extension.

. '-

-.

The set-up is rea.dy to use.

... ,.

- ........ .. 0..... "

.".- ;.

"'.

.. .: . ~ : " :.......-:-"' .... ......

-- ....
' .... .

- ~.

. .

Revised 4/~/!H

... . \.,--

-.' .. . -;..

.

;.

-: - .....'....f.·. .. :-.~~ ., ...

..

'''14.- ..-:.;~~~ ~.~. .r. -- -""::.:.: ....

..
.. ...... ..', ",: ...

..."- ..;:.

05/85/2804 12:27.
g.
, h_

PUBLIC DE:FENJ::ffi
,.

PAGE; 21 .. ~
i

i .

S~eps one. (l) through four (4:) shall berepeate.d ' .for ,tl:1e ~econd set-up.

The syrinqescontaininq the drU"9'6 shall ·be

pr~par.e.d

and ,loade. d

in

the

f

o

l

l

o

w.....i..

n....q

o

r
.

d

e
.'

r

. -

......

1.) .l:l& s'!xty (60)-CC 's.yr1ngu, "each conta!ninq .'. one hundred (lOa) Heq~ o~ ~otassiua Chlo~ide . .i!>-.fif:CY (50) -cc. !isbel these "KIm '3" •

. 2) • ~ siXty (60)-<=c syr1n~esl:~ea~h ·cont:.aininq

:-

. :".: . - :;;;'01le:='hundred (lOOl Dl.g"·Clf':.Pavttlon--iIr."f1fty.-::;.-.:· :.' ...!;..::....:.~" ••

(SO r-cc·;.. Label these ~MED 12".

..

3) ll!2. s1.xriy (60) -Cc syrinqe cOllti1n111q :2.0.
grams of Sodium Pentotha+' (cont:ents c£ fOUl: (4-}£1ve-hunclrea '( 500) mg' 'vials dissolved in the least amount of diluent possible te' att:ain. complete, clear suspension)"

The Sodium Pellt~thal, being a federally con~rolled dl:uq, : shall be prepared last, .'}(hen·"·~t appearsit.
;qil~ be used.. Label this syrinqe -MBD 11"_

NO'.fE: Three syrinqes of Pavulon and:. three. .syt":lnqe.s of Potassium Chloride are prepared; even tnQ~qn the injactic~ proceaura cnly calls for two of

'.

... "bey-asc"h',•'.inT:h-tehee:''..etv..e.an.1s;.·yorin!elq-oesf

is ar~
tlie:

prepa.r
'ot:heri

e

d

as "s~311d-
dropped' in

,_ .. _- ..---

handling during the inject!~n ~rocedure.

".

4-. Injection ~rocedure

a. The: 8:nqioc~th' will be ~en:ed into the vein of·

the left ~ and secured in place. The flow of

a Lactated Rinqers shall be s~arted and administered
at slow rate (20ce/ho~r).

.. -.

.-b. Prepare the left a:na for the intraveneous line by placinqa constricting hand one inch above the anticubital fossa. selsct ~he vein to be Carulula-caQ,

c. clean the x.v. site- with an alcohol prep.. Start
at insertion site and·make circles,getting larger each time until a four inch a;-.ea is clean.

d',

ppen. an anqiocath of' appropri.ate s1ze~

"-
and stretch

. ,the:- skin. at the insereion' site... 6' With, a: b~ve1. Upj ..

. 40 de.gre.e, ang'le of attack',' p.lace··ih~ an-q1ocath 1ri

~lwised 4-/1/94

27 1.·-.

I -
. I

, . ..; ...... - ... ~ .: - .. ~
_ .... --e:= -~ •

J:~ -.~

-...--! .......... -

85/85/2804 12: 27. 418-508-2012

PUBLIC I£FENDER

PM£. 22

toe vein. Advance "the ca.theter over' the ·stylett.a. until the hub is ~t the level of th~ skin.
e. ~HOVE THE CONSTlUCTING BANll.

'" :
"

or Obf;lerve the I. V. $itefor Sweilling:.

:" ,

'. - _.

.dis-coloration. confir;n 'that t:~...~.-Y-;~ 1s:= fiOWinq:,.-:~'i-;'/'" .:y

... . . -- .

. . . ~ ~ - . ·:-~~~-:~~::-:O:::~~--==--':':::'!:!&-~:'~:·a"'~~:':'~"

h. Sac'Ure the. r.~.V. catheter with 1::ape.

;

....~, Slow th,e ::t. v: to XtIO. 20 t'o 30 ail/hr ~ ,

in j.

stat) one is .repeated' for che r:Lgn-c atill.: 'This '1 Lne sheil be held. 'rese~.re a,~' a contingtillCY in casa

of 'malfunction or blockage in ~h&'£irst, line.

NOTE: At this painc, ene admtnistraticn sets shal~
be running aC' a .slow rate offldW~; and:t:'$ar!? :01:-
de inset"tian of the. syringes c:on;r;aining the i..!ij ect:ion ag:encs. abSeI"'Tat!.cn of both, set:.-tips 'to .ensura thac -:he rate of ilow ~s uninterr'..l'pt:d
shall be maintained.

. NO FttRTmR AC7lQN shall· be. takan. until the
prearran9ad siqna.l to start the injec'tion of lethal agents is given by the ExeC1ltion.
coitJllander.

k. ,Wi~sses 1:0 the. ~xecuti.on.: shall..: be 'brought in

only after Ue r.actated:~qers I.v' s. 'have b4en

started and are running' prol?erly.

'

1. Total anonymity of the injectio~ te~members in the illj'ection: room· shall be 'ma.in.tained ~.- At D.Q. ~ shall they; be addressed by'pnaae, or asked
anyth1n,9' that would require a verbal re~~se.

The tip of sY1='inqe'- "'MED i1'" (Sodium ?~ntotha.l)

n- shall'be, insert;ed. into tue 3. lead extension'- port
lIlarked "Port: ,loW'. Open-, the. flow' clamp to. pore'-

. "

and the injec:tion shall commence. A steady even

flow of tha injection shall be maintained with ~
only a minimum amount of force appl~ed ~o' ~he

)~yringe. plunqer:..·-

: .

n. "HBD i~" will be reJrlQved. .fro._··Port I ito and the

Revised, 4/1/94 '

,

28
.,

/./:-...i

i'

..-

"
:"

*.. - ....

..-.. -. -

.'

.'
-'.. ~

.·"85/8512884 . 12: 27 4Hl-58S-2812

PAGE 23

," -: ................ ".

'.

.fif<~;rw.t

c:!lall'Dclosed. en second's td

The J:v.will.i:.le. flush thel,. ine ..

rv.n

wide

o~e!l

o. ~ttach the first sh~~qe, o'f:"~.·t~.. "tc)'ftport #2" j
open the flow Clattlp.toport.~2 ~d:inject t h e ·
total 'cQnt:ents ot.'Cbe sYringe.; ".When tile ;first"-'
'S'Y7inq& is esnpty,· close the f~ow <:lail1' to port: ~Z I
sWltch to the second syringe of -u:rmt2ft I if
n.ecessaryi open -ehe flow clatllp and: inject th$
sac9nd .syringe., elosit the flow claJllp. to 9<>rt· i2 .

to ~'.. " .Open the. flow.· control va.!:'!e and· run::: the: -IV wide' .
• •&. ~~. :~..; open-'"for ten:: ~econds-: :rlt1Sr.the:.:r:-ll'ne:;~-:;.·"·~·· .w..... . .... .~

At.t.,ac!l the'first s~inqe of. -KED #3 rt to "Por;: ~3"'. open ~h"e fle~ clamp to ji)Ol:t. ~3:i!lld.. injsct: 'Che conteui;S· of .the- syririqe- •. Clos~ t:h~. flow c1amp ';:0 port'~3, swi~ch ;:~ the second -~ g3- syrinqe, ~= necessa~II open ·the·=low ~lsmp and i~jcc;: ~hE co~tents of the syrinqe. clese ;:he flow clamp ~e pcr~ 43.
r.· Upon: l;omplscicn o:t 'the iilject:i.ons. or a1: s:uc!J. "
u.rl.·ieI: \:!..31e as ma.y he ~pprepr:..a.t~,c.h.e pitys:"~:"an sha.ll -examine t!le .inmate to"pronounce d.e!!:~!l.
ll.f'tcr the wi'C..'"lesses !lav~ ::ae!1. ::-smc';ed., ::cC~:::,:iT
lines shall be removed from. the veins and .the tubinq $hal~ be passed throuqh the. opening into che ~acu~~on ~~amb~r .
.tL t:quiPaent an~f lethal ar-,.lI;1S. shall "!le 'qatherac: 1.1'P" ~y
the Ole following the executi.on.

1) Th.e o!e' shall be rs'silons,1b1e for· ene disposa':' of the·.1Re.dic.al aqui:pmmi:c Used for lathal 1!l.ject.!.on. It wil:"l:4::te treat.ed wit:.h st2.!lde~d
iIIedioal ?rocedures-.

2.) -The· designee- shul mail1t:ain s1icuri.ty·· 0:: t;he druqs until such time·ii.$ 'theyafi ill-med ever" to the warden.

3) . Th~ druqs shall be secured for a minimum ot ten (10) days '. fo.!lowi!i.q .the- '<!xecut.io!l:

At least ten. (10) days- after thEa. execution,

and at'the direction of th&Warden, a .

designated s'taff member shall dispose of the

drug'S used for lethal inj.ection in. accordance

with State and: Federal laWs _ .

. "

... -....

'.
"" ....

--" _.

.......

- ........--: .......

. . -~.-'"

..85/85/2884 12:27

4HI-588-.2i in. 2'

PAGE 24
-.

:. ........
Revised 4/1/'4

- .- _....
.'-
-._. ~ -"'"-,.
.. .. --...~ -- ...~

85/85/2004 12:27

41B-588-2812
.'

PAGE 25

.,

·.Section VI

.' . nEAm wATCH: nAM

. -"'~"'-'<

to .' !"ord~tailed.. retillil:"'elllen.t:s rafe-r' JI..ppe!ldix ~19}

.'
'rh.e Oeat..lt Watch Team. shall. maintain a: log of til act:1vi.<;i.~s
rel:ated t?'.the inmate.

hou~inq ~sa' by -Ch~ .,neath Wa':cb Team.

...'-

. .~,

. !..Ll.e: .......-:.... _ ... _&-::.-..,

s:cus's '.-- -.'

c. 'O'PCn' oraers, t:~m .the :=xsc:ut:ion' commander·, t:b.~ neath ?ic..t:c~ ~iam sha~ apylyraseiaints.to ~th~.inm~t. and assis~, if
uectSsary I l.n t:he. !.ppli~a-ci,:t!, ; f ':.he :;:r;G l.sads e.nd./or :;!:.tl. catiletus ;:~. ~Zl.e inDulte ~

0.

-- Upon crd9:s'i=:m ~he !xacU~l~n commands~, c= ~he C~i=~

saCUl:it;t and ci<.e. Dea1:h w;;.~::;'~ -r~&m shall :!sc~r1:': the' :':l!.iJ.a;:.a
the Dea~h C!l!.1!lber. The .:assiqned. Chaplai.;J, may es:::.::::z:-::: t:h.e

'--

inmat:s as far aS~9 Chamber' ~oom'door, if so ~s~~astGc b~

the inmat:s, T~ersaft~=, the ~~apla~~ 5~al~ a~~~'t~e.=~a~h

nOUS~ and r~a~~ ~ the c::::mmanc!CFera~~:~s =~~ar ~~~~

complecion of the,L~cu~ion.

~hs Dea~ "etch ~eam: under c~~ c!=ac~icn o~ ~be C~;~ C~ Sscurii:Y,. .ihal.l sei:-...u:~ CE inmiit:.· i:l. -:he-. ch~1.r---:li: ··~ll:- ';;-as ' ...... " cliamear or o~ ~e ~-nay anc r~cv$ the handc~=is andl=g i=ons.

the .. _The.. d.esiqna.ted i'ersonnal shall at:;;ach a.ll'ulonit.:ll:i.nq

equipment ·to ~he 'inmate, to he moA~tored bv.

medical

oersonnel, The Chief of SE~U!'!t!', and Esc;rt T'a!.m.sha.ll

~~!t the death chamher~

--,!'! Ths-,cb:a3lber' and Chamica,l O£Eics-rS' shall. elose. the: Gas
Cha1l!ber or 'Lethal !njection Cl::.amber -deor;' assure th.at it is
progerty s:a~ed, ~d no~ify the Execution Commander of same.

The Chief of secur:ity and the· !leath Watch. Tee.m. shail retu...1:1

to the housing .area of the Death Sousa and 5't:anc! !:;)v for
iur.t:her. instr.uc:tions. The &lea i cal personnel shall~ r~ltain in '" : ,
the Execution: chamber are-a: to monttOl='" the inmate and report .

t

h.

e "

'findinqs

to

the SXecution coa.unana.er.

t .•: .'\t the- time: of. the execution, t:he onlv- cerso:a:.a ·e;UthO'ri4Eld. to

. be- in:; th& 'execution: Chamber area; tte:,": - --'

~

~

"

: .,~

05/05/2004 12:27

PUBLIC. DE:FE:HOCR

PAGE 26

1. Execu·t:"ion C~lIUJtander

.

2. 3.

~arc:ien~. Hartland .PenitentiarY'
ExecutIon TeaJD. Meia.bers'. .

-4. Re(!orderJ~ey Control Officer .

J.

- S. Medical, Doctoi .., ..

Onea th~

Gas

..
cham

b

e

-
r

.dec, ontamina~ion'

'proces~'

i's

complete,

...',

~.'bthodey. C,' hrealtl¢oevre-aanldl·'·Cchoenmtiacmali.noaftefid.

cers, shall clothing,

remove the. photograph

1l1l1late.t s the' body

~a,nfdiPtOusr1ntiiont,ionve~rc'ctoordthaeD.cDa eWatih.t.Wh'aptrceh-dTeasUi9tDwahtoe.ds'.hpraolclehdeu:rnedsl9•'

iteath~oi1..lilo~"j~a1.io~$~~~~taJi';iJ.me..,,,.i~: ::.·:;:;"":0. '

.'acnadthteutrenr's·'iftroomv'eUr tet·o; :btohd~y:,D. eraetmho'vWe~:Utclhc'1l'.~Qi8tih,iwnh(qf~

pho1,:oqraph shall' place

the it

body.. in.a..

.

pbroodcyebdauqreasn. d handle c.ltQPositioI!. in acc' orda_ nce with ',pre-designated.

and t. The oeath Watch shall clean'

secure t!le 'Death. ROUSe

housing' araaarid. will remairi. on dutyuntl.l relieved by i:he
Ward~n.

. .. ... .~::

.' .
., '
·i·~·
32/:~
.:......

- ~ ..
I !. : " ._ .. . _"".;::
- .......
""'.-" .

..85/85/2884 12:27

4HI-5B8-2812

PUBLIC DEFENDER

PAGE 27

"
f
.'
,Se6tion ,VI:I

. .. ..... . ...
'3.
c.

.

~.

At- '~i time' p~i~~ .~~. cii~: S~ecUtion 'Coaimande~ directin~' th~t' .---

"

the· executi
Governor'"s

oanf.f·lb.ecge'i'no,radnedri::ngu~pao'ttl

receiving a: call.. from: the..' ast minute stay or revocat

i

.. on

,

''' _ _. • ' ..•

..of, tbe' Warrant. of Execution,' Peirltehtiary, shall stop- the.

t-hexeecAustisoinstparnotceWeda~rqd"eSn',.

Mb~a,ryland

, ~•.

' shouting. the- desi.gnc';\ted code- word.

'. ',' " ",:" .'

.' ....-;,:;,::

=_ .... ... ".;._.. ...:e':'
"wfinesses O

n

,~.,;..t>,;..:-'::':;":.
ce the procee

v
d

:
i

.... ~-
tlqs"

..~-
"ar

u
e

sto~ed, '-the . .:: :.:"..... .:.••• h:' ••

~:

::;..;:~;- ::.._~:.:.

:-"4:,ii ::';ji-::;,•

-will" be --'." -:..,. ..-;-' ':.

rweaiafto:vtneqd,' af~reoma. the 'Death ,Cham:be~ and, raturJ1ed to the wi.::ness

The..'EXeCi,11:.10n, Conm" i2md~1"
from ~~e c~vernor.

sh"aliperson2il1i. con£iJ:'!ll

the

ordsr

D.,

Oi nnmc ea tce ~cnof!bne1eree,~tohveed~"f"reoCUm't:t!h.oen

~::inunander sha Death Chaaber

lal nodr cw.~elrl

:l:.e. '

pers()nal~y. ·s.<iv.isa the wi.tIiesses" of t~e; Ci:u,.tse of. 'act:ion.

i:. FUrther procaedinq$'will be d!,;:-ect:ed by the order ana/ct; the warrant of Z:<ecutioll.

-.....--

- .. '" .-~ "

-, Revised ff/I/'94

.... .

-,,-.

'.
,
~(~ 33/ ~ ...... t :

-: : "
.:. ..
-.,

..85/B5/2804 12:27

PUBLIC DEFENDER

PAGE .28

Section VIXI

POS'rEXtCJ3.nON paOCEDURES',

from ......! .
A. Of£icial,~itnes'ses· sh8.i~ J:)e' escorted

the:~td.~ess area

to the Witness ~a~ting floOUt. to: b~:' .nS'I:.. by' 'Ch~·We.rdell,., '

" ' B. The Execution comm~der Will' c~l the commandjOpe~ations

Center, the COmmissioQer of correction andiinecessary, the

- ... .;,
~- ~

"

G()"ernor. and: DPScs. off1cials~' and repO:a:t :~he"results of

. axecut10Jl:._. ..

'=-," _.-:; .. , " :. ':,:" . . . . . ., '~

.... . . : . , " ...; .':, .;.: ..~ ":. "-:-;-'.•~-"'~."';;"...~~- ..:-:...,.;,.....

the' ..w· ••• ;;'•. . . . , • -,... - :-.....!.: ..~~~.:.~.

C. The-designated medical Bersonne! shall sigp the Ca~ifica~e
of Death {aef~r to APpendiX ~21}_

n. . Officia:i wi"t.nesses shdi s:1.gn ·t...i.e Certi£i~~te' of :Exe~uti'on'

.'

~at verifies that t~e ~~ecution has be~n accomplished

(~efer to.APpendix ~221.

to z. 'rhe.Wit!less,:::sccrt: TeUl shall,cranspor: aiiicial wit!lessas

back ,the designated loca~ion.

','

-.... The Assis~ant~araen,"Harylana ?~i~entiary w~ll ~ak~ char.qe r 'of the decontc.mination process' Refer to Apgendi;-c. ~l.3).

G. Tb& Execution ~eam shall be qirected to return·ta theDe~th

chamber ~o. re!llove· t;he body. In' the case of' a-x.ecut:ion. by . lethal qas r whent'· the :iecon't:aJllinacion' procesS" is: complete, , the- boar of': tlle-i"IllJla1:a-' shall ·he :::uovad~frOllt· the- Gas--:'

.t !
.,,' ,Ir" ,'

Chamber, stripped of .til contaminated. clothing, photographed

and turned'over to ~he Deat:~ watCh ~eam for removal to the

designated location co await pre-arranqedpick up by the

designated party .. In the caS'a.of executioIl, by' lethal injectiou, the execution team wil~emov. all catheters. .

-....'...~

str~ it .of all clothinq, photograph it and turn. it over tD

the Oeath Watch Team for placement in a body baq and removal

to th~ designated location to await pre-~anqed pick uP'bY.

the:- desi.gnated party.

.:', . ,

'

H. The DeatlJ, Chamber shall then 'be thoroughl'y" cleaned and left
in the state of readiness as described in instructions governinq the care of the Oe~th Chamber.

4. As. soan: as, practical after any press- conference" the.' .
':.::., hecution: Commander shall conduct a. critique of· the- eD.ti:Ce
axec~t~on process.
s. No later than twe.nty-f9Ul:"' (24) hours after the: c.Q1llPletion of
- the: execution. the: Warden.. .shall: submi.t to. the· ~xecuti."oD. ..' .
'co_andert~ a detailed:. collfiden~iil' .~e~tt or ~e- execution.'

.. -..
. "

, 34·{,fi.A,.J!"' '

...

-~:

--:- v .....

".05/85/2804. 12:27

......

..

i
410.;..508-2812

e" .'

.. . . '

'."

' : " ' .'.:

, q ,~ ..............,:....... .:;...~ ...·.~:v.J:,·.;A·_...e

This report''shall include: '

..

. .

..

Adr.a~t·C:over·letter·from the, Execut:ioli.CQlIUl\anae-r. t~

'.

the., ~ominissione.r announcing- completton of execution.

: ',~ .. '-'2..; Seriou~ Illcideut 'Repor-t;.' FO~ - , .-~

..

._..,.....~

-
":

:-
':.

..

"3',·

List

o

f.
.

..a. .l-

l

,

staff.

involved

and. their

roles .

. -4. List ~f all, 'of£icia~wi!=nesses ~

.. .

... ::. '.::, ~ : " "'

..... -

. 5.. LisJ:- of" all:" nOc persoiulel. preS'&~~~.... ::,~".~.~: :'.!::•.~:.~ ':" _ :.:-" . :*::.~ .!!.'

. ;. .·:...:::...-·... _ .. ~ ," : ... -.~:-" .:;;..:-r.~:- :r:~'';=~'':..J:-;t~:;.;~,",,-:~ !.- :- .';~: .. ' .. ·:...1:..... ;!'·;~~·t~~~ ~:

~;,.·1:."9:c:.~~:;

, XXCXP'I' "l'HAT"NAHES' OF ALI. HEHBE:as' OF ,TB:£:, XDCtJT:tON '.t'EAH, '

sBAt.L :sgsZAI..mJDl A SEPARATE ~LOPE A'1""l"ACSED To TaB
... REPORT AND' WlL'L. ONLY BE OPENED,· BY' ORDER, OF' 'rlm, .co~ •. .. .... .: ...

'6. List' of all staff: ,from other' aqencies' involvsd, and

their roles.

'

7 . Officia.!,record of e..,(9cu'tion as recorded by ~he official Recorder, or copy of same.

8. Cert:.ificat:e of Oea'th .. or copy o-f same.

9", Car-:::.£icata" of :::~ecution, or copy of same.

110. Any other'document and/or reports requir~d by ene

Commissiotte~ of Cer=ection, sec=e~~ of ?ublic safe~!,

"and correc.t:.ional
·Ka.rY!and~~"~-".:··':

Se.r.vice.s,'' 'o'r.C:-o- v-e-rn.o...r.,- o..f... "t:h.e

S,t:a.ta, of

." ..! ....

K. ~e Execution'commander ahall prepare a report, summariZing

the. exscution:.. , 'Phe. enll1!liss!oner shall distribute: this repol:t to th.e Governor.',· secretarf of. Public S'afe~y "and:
'correctional services, Public !niurmation atfics, etc.

.

( 'f' • oj;-

Revised 4/1/94 .... :.. .. , .

..

..

~ "

05/85/2804 12:27
•• . 't- I

RJBlIC IE='ENDER

.........

, 'The attached Lethal Injectioti completed ·indet:a!l at the·,the of.

,.I
Execution Log shU1
an.."exec.ution.by the:

lbetehal:.-=..";'..~..:2:':.:..:.:. ;:,~:·..;.·:_:2•:~:~::.'

:Lnjac:::tion.. The actual tiBe will. be entered, occurred, 'problems that were· 'encountered, et

ca.n, ywmilolv'ebm~e:nrteptOhia:tted..'.::-.:-

. .:, .._

.

soin(!teh.ains df/oorrm.a·~' diItf:iaoanadlitisohn.eaelt.sspasa.cen·ecises.. sn·eaerdye.d'·;.oUn~se&

~thhee

'reverse form is

.

.~.

cQmpleted,.it will be turned irito the Executiou·.COIlI.1Ilander, ..." ..

i1Wnediat.ely.

. .

..•.

.

:. :':':.' . ;: :.' .

..-:.-...•.:.~ .. : :.... '. .......:.,. ~.... - --..;.:..-:....:.~-..::::.:-<F.,f ..:.;. '. ,.-=:::- ''::.' '. ,..:.;.:--;,;::

"
Revised 4/1/94

- .. . . ;~ .

._'" .---.-

"

.' .

.'

" ~8.. 5/05/2004 12:27

4HI-50e-2e112

PUBLIC DEFENDER

PAGE 31

LAaKLIm
;~;

,,- ."
.. ' .:.: coNTENTS'

".~-Q~., ..... "" ....

.

' .1

.. sodiUJlt. Pent.othal, Z. 0 Ga..

. .2syriil.ge .

(four son mg vials ~issQlved in

t.ha least· amount of diluent possible

to '

a...t

-t

a

in ~

.

.com. p-l-ete,

clearsuspens!on)..

• ~.

.. ..

-.

* ••" • .

•

..:..

~

•• .-l- M:..~.pa.vUioD;:;:.s~.1Dq·per -5.0-C"c~..~:- -;":~:1:..;~z.:syr1nges~~-'::,. ',.....:;;...2.:-..-':..

.

(five 10ce aJIlj,n1les of 10 mq each .

.

~n each sY1"~ge). ".

- MED #3·

p01:ass:ium.·chlcu:ide:i. 5·Q. milequ:i.v.:.- ~2syrinqes (five. 10 ce. ampules- of 10' ailequiv. each in each syringe;-,

.

..'

To-cal injec:tioni lOOec/100 milequiv ••

or two syrinqes. One extramadi!' up

as stand-by-. .

.. ' '. -

- "','"

............

'.,
".
'.

.... 05/05/2004 12:27 ~

410-588-2812

PUBLIC'IUDIDER

PAGE 32

'Appendix 13-A '"

, "
Le~al ~ject~oil ProcedureS. Check'Sheet:
:, ...~ ::.~;..:: ~.,.w ...
Date Set --------~____I 19- ~

.,-

.... t .....

•

~ • • -~!..~. . . . . .

.. "*.~-;#." \~ ::'.".:;.J::.~::r:.: "-~.

A •
. '

Requir~ Staff

1. "Sxecuti:OII' commander:' :

2. ,~si$tant Rxecut~onco.mande~1

.. Warden

'

(

. .

. ,.-.

3. Primary operators, Lethal Injection .( J
Chamber, (3)

a. ore

( }

b. Operator 2

( )

c. Operator 3

)

4. Ch~er Recorder. Key control Officer

S. Ass.istant warden, communications

6. Secu.ri:ty Chief

".

7. Death Watch.Officer .(.1)

'., a·. DQath: Watch OffiCet::'(Z)

9, Medical Doctor

10. Maintenance- officer (1.),

11. Maintenance officer (2)

(. )
C )
( )
( L
( ) ( )
( .. )

(

._ ..- . .-_....

--.-- .~

.

........... ~-"'-

.

.(

)

( .

( " , .

{

}

. {

}

( .)
( .)

- " ..

(

)

(

)

(.

.---- )

, ,

.•! ."-.....~.,~.

( .)

.' .
ReVised 4:/1/94
..
o·
'" ~ .. :;

... " ..

, '.

..........

3l

--.. . ......

- ... . ~

., ...

, ,,,.85/05/26e4 12:27

418-588-2812

•

<

PAGE 33

Appendix:' 13-A

2.

pi:eparatiQ~s- ~~<~?p~~a~~q~so'f
.-.:..".............:........... -... ...

the,
",-"'"

~t. ha:ltnj~tion

Chamber' "..... -.. "'.~.:..

. 1. The Executiofn: 'raaa ~ill' e~nduct- an, {}

(. )

-. inventory- 0 -necessary materials

. _.. _..

'(not. more: ·than 9-6 .hourS' 'prior: 1::.0«

execution) .. i

-

2~ .. The~..eJcecu~ion,TeD.will. i:e.;.,.invento~ , ( l '

~.- -'':':.'; -····-"'!·n~esB~Bi&t~~.a.t·l'east::.::two...._·:·~~·,:.::":,·.
hours:' prior- t() exedltiotl' .

! .'

to 3.

Not: less1:han: e}tsctitioll:.' the:

a2g4e' mho:su-ras.rep:roiobrta. .inetdhe

( <)

(

4. Drugs arf! issu'ed, checked, and placed ( ). in 1:.he ~ethal !D..j action drug box

(

S. Tna lethal injectiondrUq box is sealed

(

6. rnject~on Team member.ustmaintain
personal control of drug box <

7. The' orc. of the :rnj ection 'ream.. shall

ensure that the qas ehamber drape !!\lid

the Witne.ss ROOll( ,drape are in the

closed POsition.

( . )

{

(

)

NAHX:.-...____.....______________________

.-

.' .., ".-..

1'- ••

" ....Jl.
Revised 4/1/94
. ..

85/85/2884 12:27
0'

418-588-2812

PAGE 34

c. I~V. Set-trp-Procedure

1~90.Dilifutespri()r . toex~c:utiQn. tb;e

- Inj ection TeClJQ is in 'Cbe Lethal

:rnjec~ionChaJ!lber ROQm.·

. ;

~
a 2.: The- OI:C ~hall' prapare 'tll.e: 'necessary ·equipmen.t, complete pre.-axe~tioti inyento:ry and,equ1pJlient'check .

Appendix 13-A

(

)

)

(

)

{a.} -Prep-table: ., ,

6 60 c.c syrin~es '.

C: )

z' I.V •. Bags . . .

( )

2. Administration ~ets

( l

Z Needle locks

.( )

2. 3 4ead', extensions

( )

2 Extensions

( )

6 18 gauge 1 1/2 straight

needles

{ )

2. Pressure infusion haqs

( )

'1 (b) Instramen.1: Stand

(

)

(

)

(

)

(

)

(

)

(

)

( {

6 Alcohol prep pads.

-( )

3 Anglocath 20 qauge

( )

:3 Angiocath 18 gauge

( )

3 Anqiocath 16 gauge

( )

"1

Constricting~and

( )

1 Roll tape

( )

2 4 x 4 pads

( )

'2 ec) :tnstrum.ellt Stand

--=---

.1 Pair gloves

( )

3 Pair eye protectors

( )

3 surgical. masks

( 1

3. EXecution commander notified set.-up equipment has been prepared

, (

)

{

}

{

1 •

(

)

{

} .

(

)

(

1

(

)

(

)

(

).

a. Execution Commander approves

s~t.-up'~quipment

( .)

b. Execution commander itrstructs OIC to begin set-up process
4. The !.V'. bag will be: opened and.
- inspected

( )
( .1 ( l· L', l-, ( " }

Revised 4/1/'4

.

<,

.'

~~ . \....,..I

-05/85/2884 12:27

4HI-50a-2812

PlII3LIC DEFENDER

PAGE 35

Appendix 13-A

6ndTheeadihd:fliecnI-at;<iClnvae1iei:BoUpened

to the top and. clos,ad

'

6w£SPilteFtl1l:, ih~.dbag .8htblBeclihaltith a way'

) (
(). ( )

) ( .J.
)

fi\oSl\tt!][~hstlte. 'aiuidlecilvek to the top

{ 1 ( 'l

{

a.' Attach the 3 lead e.xt,ension. to the' ( ) ( )

(

(

n~edle lock and, ,secure

9. Attach the 2.0 n ' extension set 'to ,the ( ) ( ). admuistration set and,'tape

)( )

iQi~starpurqedflow'of ry flUid tintii ~ll ( ) ( )

(

}

11. place the pressure infuser,,over, the ( ()

)

I.V. ba~ and iuflate to green line

12. Mark ,the ports'of the 3 lead

( ')

~tension; i l , t 2 , ~3 or use color

code markinqs

(

}

13. Repeat steps 4 thru 11 {for the

( }

}

second line}

14. Execution commander is notified that

set-u~ is ~omp~ete

(,)

a. Execution Commander approves set-UP

lS.Execution conuil.ander instructs OLe

to prepare medication

( )

(

1

16. Warden tests red/green liqhts in

Lethal Injection~oom and chamber

Lights- to be' in off Posit,ion -

( )

)

,D. Me.dication preparation

1. "Prepare 1;WO syringes 60cc',

( )

Potassium Chloride, loomeq each.

Label Hed #3 or use color code

2. Prepare two syringes 60cc

( )

"Pavulon, 100 mq each. Label

KED- t2 or usa color.code

3. Prepa:r;e two syringe 60cc

( r

)

Revised 4.Jl/9~

:

. 05/9512904 12:27 41B-saS-2e12

PUBLIC DEFENDER

PAGt 36

SQdiwa, .pentathol, i·~OQOmg. Label
MED 111 or us~ color 'code

AJlPend1.x 1.3-A

4. OICnoti.fi.es EXe<!tttion co1llnlande~ HEDS are·pt~pared

(':r'

E ~ placement of inmate. in: h~cut.i~ Chamber

1. Executi.on COuu.andel; directs Warden

to ascort the i.J:uItate to the Letha1

Inject£Oll:: Chantber. arid· place: hila. on

the gurney:

•.

2.·Warden.direc-ts Death Watch Team to

... prepare ;the

i

n.

m
"

a

t

e

for

the

exe. cution.

'. ()

a. Dea~h Watch Team places inmate

on. the quJ,:Dey in the. Lethal

Injection·Cbatnber a.nd straps

him down .

( )

1
(

b. Death watch Team exits Lethal

in Injection Chamber. closes door
and staiIds by the Death

aouse housing'sras

( )

.(

F. Injection procedure

L plac~ a constrictinqbanaon the.left ( ) ( ) arm, one, inch abOVe the anticubital. fossa. select a vein.

{

} ,

2. Cl.ean the 1:.V. site wita alcohol.

{ 1 (J

)( )

3. Open an anqiocath of appropriate
size.

{" 1 (

)( )

4. stretch the skin at the site and insert the anqiocath, bevel up.

{J { } (

( )

5. Advance the catheter over the stylette. .
6. F.EMOV'E 'l'KS CONSTRICTING BAND
7. Apply pressure to the 'dis~al end o£ the catheter and remove the style.tte. .

(

'{

{ l

1. ( )
l (1

« .,. . ) ( .... )-

(

) ( ) ..,.

.~""

.....

Revised 4/1/94

.....<... L.-.------'
;.;/..../

05/85/2004 12:27
',}'t" ,'.

418-508-2012

PAGE 37

Appendix 13-A

8. A-r;tach the· I.v . tub3.ng and start

(-}

( .

) (

) ,

the.·flow-of fluid.

9. 'Observe for s~ellinq ~r discolorati~n () ()

) (

Confirm flow of I.V.

10. Secure the I.V. ~i't.h tape.

( r .( ,,) (

)' C- 1

11. Slow-the I.V., to ICVO, 20-30 ml/hr

;.(
:'c:-

).........

f
_..

).'
-":.':'.- ...

( . :: .,

) ..

(

1

12. All. an9ioeatb will De' $~curedin: the. ( ) (~ (

) . { 'J

right: a..rtn, £ollowinq steps 1 thru 11

. . 13-. Ole verifies- mat: the- execution
process is ready tobein and .

( ). ( )

) ( ')

~otifies,the EXecution 'Commander

14: Lights. are t.urned down in the Lethal {} () (

(

In1 ec't.ion Room and the Witnes.s Room

G. BSCQrl: of llit::11esses to Wi.tness Area.

1. Execution Commander escorts

L)

witnesses, to Witness Roo.

2. Witnesses in place in witness area

(

3: ExecUtion Commander opens drapes to ( )

{

witness' area

H. EXecution Procedure
At any tilae the Executiolr -eommander# w~en or axe, find: it necessary to stop the, execUtion process; the~ shall
light, .the. red li9ht and tuol· off the qreen light. ·If.
open·, the il1.t:.n.ess Roo., drapes will ber immediately: closed until the- cause· is' detendned'•. W1tneS'seS" will be notified as. appropriate by the Bxecnl1:ion. Comaander ..

1. Signal. to commence the execution is ( )

(

given by the EXecution commander by

lighting the,green light in the

Lethal. Injection Roo.

.

a •. Tbe- warden will light the qreen ()
light in the EXecution Chamber illdic-.ting MEl) ..t~ is. being
adlainistered

Revised 4/1/94

. .135/05/2004 12:27
.,. u'

4113-5138-2012

PAEE ·38

2. KED #1 is inserted into Port J1, the flow clamp opened. arid tbe ~ medication adJainistered to the· left arm: of t:heil:imate-·· .

Append.ix 13-A (

3. HED-#I removed, flow clamp closed,

) .

(

1:.V. run. wide' open for ten: secondS

a) The warden will ·turn o£f the

(

green light in. the L&tha~,

, I:njec:ti.on... ChaJRbel';'I -indicat~n,g­

MED itl has· been· lldministered

( "

~ _ MEn 12 is inserted. ilito Port,2,

( )

(

the flow- clamp' opened and the: '

medication. administered

a. The green light is turned on

)

)

indicating MED :2 is being

administered

5. MED ,2 (second s.yringe) is
- administered in Po~ 12

{

(

)

6. MAD· #2 removed, flow clamp closed
:t.v. rans·wide open for ten seconds

a. Turn off qreea. l1qht to

(

indicate MED't.2 has· been

adlUinisterea

7. HKD 13 is. tnserted into Port t3,

( }

1

the flow clamp opened and the

medication administered

_.__-

a. TUrn on green light to indicate C·}

(

MED i3 is· being administered

,8. MED #3 (second syringe) is
administered in Port 13

(l'!' )

(

a. TUrn off green li9'ht -.to indicate MED 13 has been administered·

( )

(

l

...

9. Close the flow clamp to Port 1t3

( )

. (

10. When it appears to' the. Medical Doctor (. )

(

observing the inma·te:. frtlJlt. 'the Lethal __,-

Injection Room that death has ...

Revised 4/1/94

05/85/2804 12:27
41. i t ,

418-588-2812

puBLIC DEFEHDER

PAGE 39

-
Ap~iendix . 1.3-A

occu~red# he shall advise the oIel
Wa~de.n·"

a. The. oct/warden shall

( l

. continuoufJly turn the green·

li9h't..on/offin· a· blinking-:

manner

. - . , ...,.. ".., .....
"

11. 'Opon observing.. 'Che blinking green. ()

{, )

liqht; the Exeeut.1on. COUIJlander will. ' " :: .

c.lose.... the.: W1tness,.'Room·. drape., 1:Urn: '~"'~:'~:~':::~-"~-:''':''''

of£ 'the gre'en, light:~ in: tne Lethal

"

Injection ROODl and SUmMon the Medical .

Doctor to con£iradeata

.

12. Medical Doctor will' c(lnfini death· .. .( '.)

(

)

13. The Warden will prepare a cei't.l£~cat;e ( ) of Execut.ion and present it to .the '... Execution Commander. All persons'will ex~t the Lethal Injection Chamber' ~d, stand by. '

(

}

14. Execution Commander reads the

( )

Certificat.e of Execution to the

wit.nesses and directs them back

to the Witness Waiting Area

lS~ Witnesses are esco~ted out of the Injection Ch~er Room

(""r-~ :.

, C' . )

"

a. wit.ness ROom door is closed

{ )

and locked.

_..:....,,--

16. I.V. will be rellloved and passed into ( ) .the injection %:001l

}

(

)

17. Ole collects all equipment

( )

, (

18. Unused drugs are secured, placed , in the secure Lethal Inj ection Drug Box, and held for ten,d~ys
,19. ixecut10n Tea. removes all clothing frour the inmate'
20. Bo~y is photoqrap.hed by the Execution Tea..
21. Inmate, clothing is- disposed of in .
B.e~ised '4:/1/94:
38

( .) .
) ( )
..
( ).

.' .( ' )'

(

)

(

)

, .
...

.' '

; 05/05/2004 12:27 418-508-2812

RJa..IC.~

PAGE 40

t.he disposal bag
22. Boay i.s pli-\~e:d:Ui· body·ba'qbY th~ . Death W.atchTeuf and.:d1sposed of
per pre-determined·arrangemettts',

Appendix 13-1\ 1

'23. warden designates ,st.aff· member to

{ }

dispose Q~ dl;'Ugs ,

24. proqs· ~e disposed

( )

(

)

:I. "!he Execution .CCHlUiuulder .wi11 .coitduct, a;' crit:lque of the execution process iDimediately· ·followiIlg the clean-Up process

Revised 4/1/94

-:;...- ....
. ..

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR BALTIMORE CITY, MARYLAND STEVEN HOWARD OKEN, Plaintiff,
v.
Frank C. Sizer, Jr., CommissiOner Maryland Division of COrrection, William Williams, Warden Maryland Correctional Adjustment Center .Baltimore, Maryland Gary Hornbaker, Warden MetropolitanTransition Center and UNKNOWN EXECUTIONERS, Defendants.
AFFIDAVIT OF JEROME H. NICKERSON JR. ESQ.
After being duly sworn by me a Notary Public for the state ofMatyland, Jerome H.
Nickerson Jr., Esq. did state as follows:
1. My name is Jerome H. Nickerson, Jr. and I reside at 1104 William Street, Baltimore. Maryland.
2. I am an attorney and member in good standing of the Maryland Court ofAppeals. For
fifteen years my practice has consisted almost exclusively ofstate and federal post-conviction representation ofdeath sentenced inmates in Florida, Maryland, Pennsylvania and South Carolina.
I

3. In 1994, I was appointed by the Federal District Court for the District ofMaryland to represent Mr. Tyrone X. Gilliam in federal habeas corpus proceedings challenging Mr. Gilliam's convictions and sentence ofdeath in the CircuitCourt for Baltimore County, Maryland. For four
years I represented Mr. Gilliam before the District Court, the United States Court of Appeals for
the Fourth Circuit and the United States Supreme Court. 4.. Ultimately, all ofMr. Gilliam's challenges were rejflCf;ed by the federal courts and the
Governor ofMaryland, the Hon. Paris Glendening, denied Mr. Gilliam's request for executive
clemency.
5. On the evening ofNovember 16, 1998, I was present in the death house ofthe
Maryland Penitentiary when the sentence ofdeath imposed by the Circuit Court for Baltimore County was carried out. Other individuals present in the death house who I lecogni~ included Mr. Gilliam's spiritual adviser, Sister Ashida Kalil and two media witnesses selected by the
Maryland Department of Corrections, Ms. Caitland Franke ofthe Baltimore Sun and Mr. Greg
Toppo ofthe Associated Press. 6. After I was escorted to the death house the curtain to the widow separating the death
chamber from with witness gallery was retracted. I was standing directly in front of the widow of
the lethal execution chamber when the curtain was pulled back.
7. At that time I observed Mr. Gilliam lying on the execution gurney with his arms
outstretched. From this vantage point I could see that IV lines had already been established by the execution team in both of his arms. From my position I could see the IV lines stretched
from Mr. Gilliam's arms back to an opening in a wall ofthe lethal ~ection chamber.
2

8~ hnmediately, when the execution began, I observed fluid running down the exterior surface of the IV line closest to the witness gallery. I watched as this fluid followed the path of - the IV line from the opening in the wall into the execution chamber to where the line arced upwards towards Mr. Gilliam's aim. At the lowest point ofthe IV line drops of fluid began to fall and collect on the floor ofthe lethal injection chamber. This dripping continued throughout Mr. Gilliam's execution.
9. The dripping began immediately after the IV line jerked or twitched for the first time.
By this I mean that I observed the IV line closest to me sway back and forth and jump as ifit bad
been infused with pressure. I viewed the IV line jerk three times iIi this fashion. After each of
these three jerks I noticed the volume ofliquid traveling down the exterior ofthe IV line increase and a corresponding increaseJn the rate of fluid dripping. After each jerking motion the volume . of dripping fluid would increase and would theQ slow until the line jerked again when the rate of dripping would again increase.
10. After I ob.served the flfStjerk in the IV line I noted fluid continuously drip from this
line onto the floor ofthe execution chamber. By the time Mr. Gilliam was pronounced dead a
puddle of liquid had fomied on the floor of l~ injection chamber immediately below where the IV line was located. This puddle had an irregular circumference of five to seven inches across.
11. As we were escorted from the death house I wasjofued by Ms. Franke ofthe _BaltUnore Sun and Mr. Toppo ofthe Associated Press. We were taken to a room close to the front entrance ofthe Maryland Penitentiary where we were instructed to wait before being taken to the Reception and Classification Center where the Department of Corrections was to hold a
3

,
press conference regarding Mr. Gilliam's execution. While in this room I recall Ms. Franke asking a Department ofCorrections official regarding the fluid seen dripping during Mr. Gilliam's execution. I recall this official's answer to Ms. Franke's inquiry was that dripping fluid during a lethal injection execution was "normal" and the execution team encountered no problems during Mr. Gilliam's execution. When I attempted to enter the press conference at the Reception and Classification Center I was advised by a Department ofCorrections officials I would not be pennitted to attend and a guard was instructed to escort me off Department of Corrections property.
12. This affidavit dQeS not exhaust my knowledge regarding lethal injection executions in gen~> the 1994 Execution Procedures adopted by the Maryland Department of Corrections .or other practices ofthe Maryland DepartIilent of Corrections with respect to lethal injection executions from the period 1994 to the presen
"(
,. '..

Signed before me, a NotaIy Public for e State of Maryland, at Harford County,

Maryland this 14th day of May 2004.

~~~.
NotaIy Public for the State of Mary d

My Commission Expires:

SHARON A. SQ\NI
NOTARY PU8UC STATE Of MARYlAND My CoollniuiQn Expire$Jonoory 15,2005

Page40.f 4

