Deep learning is very influential in both unsupervised and supervised learning, many researchers are handling sentiment analysis by using deep learning. It consists of numerous effective and popular models and these models are used to solve the variety of problems effectively BIB10843611 . The most famous example Socher has used is the Recursive Neural Network (RNN) for the representation of movies reviews from the website rottentomatoes.com BIB18690358 . By following the effort of BIB5959482 , many researchers has performed sentiment classification by using neural networks. For example, Kalchbrenner BIB1306065 anticipated a DyCNN (Dynamic Convolutional Neural Network) which use a pooling operation, i.e, dynamic k-max pooling on linear sequences. Kim  use CNN to learn sentiment-bearing sentence vectors. Furthermore, Paragraph vector is proposed by Mikolov, et al. BIB16447573 which performs better sentiment analysis than bagof-words model and ConvNets for learning the SSWE (sentiment specific word embedding). Recently BIB15409284 has applied ConvNets on characters rather than directly applying on word embeddings. Another composition model for the classification of sentiments is LSTM which can simply take flow on one input direction BIB3033526 . In this paper, Section II covers the detailed literature review and Section III presents the conclusion whereas, Section IV shows the analysis phase been analyzed in literature review. In the Literature Review section, various studies of sentiment analysis using Deep Learning techniques are discussed. This review is conducted on the basis of numerous latest studies in the field of sentiment analysis.