This study BIB1713103 has proposed two deep learning techniques for the sentiment classification of Thai Twitter data, i.e., Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) and Short Term Memory (LSTM). Data processing was conducted properly. Data was collected from the users and their followers of Thai Twitter. After filtering the data, only the users with Thai tweets and tweets with Thai characters were selected. Five experiments were conducted to achieve finest parameters for deep learning, to compare the deep learning with classical techniques and to achieve the words sequence importance. Three-fold cross validation was used to verify the process. The results concluded that the accuracy is high in DNN than LSTM and both techniques of deep learning are higher in accuracy than SVM and Nave Bayes but lesser than Maximum Entropy. Higher accuracies were found in original sentences than shuffled sentences so the words sequence is important. In this research study BIB16881263 a hybrid model has proposed which consists of Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN) and a two layered Restricted Boltzmann (RBM). The purpose of proposing this hybrid deep learning model is to attain better accuracy of sentiment classification. The polarity, i.e., negative and positive reviews vary according to different context in order to solve this type of problem this model performs well, neutral reviews are not considered. Experiments have done with datasets of Pang and Lee and Blitzer, et al., binary classification implemented on every dataset. The accuracy has been enhanced for five datasets by comparing with the existing state-of-the-art Dang, et al. BIB52860197 . There are no outer resources in proposed approach such as POS tagger and sentiment dictionary etc therefore it is faster too than competitor. To attain a reduced number of features the dimensionality reduction has been implemented as previous study used a complex strategy for feature selection. Approaches based on hybrid neural networks are presented in summarized form in Table  VI . The accuracy results are compared with previous works and proved better DBNFS than DBN.