The CNN (convolutional neural network)  includes pooling layers and sophistication as it gives a standard architecture to map the sentences of variable length into sentences of fixed size scattered vectors. This study BIB6146823 has proposed a novel convolutional neural network (CNN) framework for visual sentiment analysis to predict sentiments of visual content. CNN has been implemented using Caffe and Python on a Linux machine. Transfer learning approach and hyper-parameter has been used in biases and weights are utilized from pre-trained GoogLeNet. As CNN enhance its performance by increasing its size and depth, so a very deep CNN model, inspired by GoogLeNet is proposed with 22 layers for sentiment analysis. It is optimized by using SGD (Stochastic gradient descent) algorithm. The strategy with 60 epochs has been performed for training the network as GoogLeNet has performed 250 epochs. For experimental work, a dataset of twitter containing 1269 images is selected and back propagation is applied. Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) and popular crowd intelligence is used to label the images. Five workers were involved to generate sentiment label in favor of every image. The proposed model was evaluated on this dataset and acquired better performance than existing systems. Results shows that proposed system achieve high performance without fine-tuning on Flickr dataset. However AlexNet was used in previous works and GoogleNet provided almost 9% performance progress than AlexNet. By converting GoogLeNet in to visual sentiment analysis framework, the better feature extraction was achieved. Stable and reliable state were achieved by using hyper parameters. The authors BIB207226212 have proposed the system of deep learning for sentiment analysis of twitter. The main focus of this work was to initialize the weight of parameters of convolutional neural network and it is critical to train the model accurately while avoiding the requirement of adding new feature. A neural language is used to initialize the word embedding and is trained by big unsupervised group of tweets. For further refining the embedding on bulky supervised corpus, a conventional neural network is used. To initialize the network, previously embedded words and parameters were used, having same architecture and training on supervised corpus as of Semeval-2015. The components used in proposed work are activations, sentence matrix pooling, softmax and convolutional layers. To train the network, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and non-convex function optimization algorithms were used and to calculate the gradients back propagation algorithm was used. Dropout technique were used to enhance the neural networks regularization. The deep learning model is applied on two tasks: message level task and phrase level task from Semeval-2015 to predict polarity and achieve high outcomes. By applying six test-set, the proposed model lies at first rank in terms of accuracy. A detailed research by  has presented an overview of sentiment analysis related to Micro-blog. The purpose of this effort was to get the opinions and attitudes of users about hot events by using Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). The use of CNN overcomes the problem of explicit feature extraction and learns implicitly through training data. To collect the data from target, the input URL and focused crawler have been used, 1000 micro-blog comments were collected as a corpus and divided into three labels, i.e., 274 neutral emotions, 300 negative emotions and 426 positive emotions. The proposed model has been compared with the previous studies as those had studies used CRF, SVM and additional traditional algorithms to perform sentiment analysis with a high price. However, the performance proves that the proposed model is reasonable and sufficient to enhance the accuracy in terms of emotion analysis. Research by BIB207224000 was motivated through the need of controlling of comprehensive social multimedia content and employ both textual and visual SA techniques for combined textual-visual sentiment analysis. A convolutional neural network (CNN) and a paragraph vector model were used for both the image and textual SA accordingly. The proposed model was termed as rule based sentiment classifier VADER. After conducting the wide range of experiments on manually labeled and weakly labeled visual tweets, it was concluded that mutual textual-visual features outperformed the sentiment analysis algorithms which were only depend on Visual contents. It was demonstrated that how models of one domain to a different domain can be transmitted easily. Getty Images had been selected to crawl data and Caffe was used to tune the CNN model. Tweets were gathered through Twitter API. To make sentiment labels for chosen visual tweets, the Mechanical Turk (AMT) and crowd intelligence had been employed. The results recommend that the joint textual-visual model has performed better than the both single visual and textual sentiment analysis models. In study by BIB10843611 , the researcher has represented a sevenlayer framework to analyze the sentiments of sentences. This frame work depends on CNN (Convolutional neural network) and Word2vec for SA and to calculate vector representation, respectively. Word2vec have been proposed by Google. The Dropout technology, Normalization and Parametric Rectified Linear Unit (PReLU), have been used to progress the correctness and generalizability of proposed model. The framework was verified on the data set from rottentomatoes.com which contains movie review excerpts' corpus, the dataset consists of five labels positive, somewhat positive, neural, negative and somewhat negative. By comparing the proposed model with previous models such as Matrix-Vector recursive neural network (MV-RNN) and recursive neural network (RNN), the proposed model outperformed the previous models with the 45.5 % accuracy. In Table I , we have presented the analysis of best studies following the convolutional neural network.