The recursive neural network (RNN)  lies in supervised learning. It contains a tree structure which is settled before training and the nodes can have different matrices. There is no need of reconstruction of input in RNN. The proposed work BIB14204616 builds a Treebank for chines sentiments of social data to overcome the deficiency of labeled and large corpus in existing models. To predict the labels at sentence level i.e positive or negative, the Recursive Neural Deep Model (RNDM) was proposed and achieved high performance than SVM, Nave Bayes and Maximum Entropy. 2270 movie reviews were collected from the website and Chinese word segmentation tool ICTCLAS was used to segment these reviews. Five classes were settled for each sentence and standford parser applied for sentence parsing. The proposed model improved the prediction of sentiment labels of sentences by concluding 13550 chines sentences and 14964 words. ME and NB performs higher with contrastive conjunction structure than baselines with great margin. In this study BIB990233 , a model comprising RNTN (Recursive Neural Tensor Network) and Sentiment Treebank has been proposed to correctly clarify the compositional effects at different levels of phrases, i.e., positive and negative phrases.The proposed model was compared with all the existing models. The proposed model outperformed the previous models with the 45.5% accuracy. In existing models, the meaning of long phrases cannot be expressed effectively by semantic word spaces, so for sentiment detection, more rich and supervised evaluation and training resources are needed as it requires more influential composition models. The RNTN achieved 80.7% accuracy in sentiment prediction by performing fine-grained labeling over all the phrases and outperformed previous models. This study BIB7492089 has contributed a generalized and scaled framework to recognize top carding/malware sellers. The model is based on deep learning for sentiment analysis and used in thread classification and snowball sampling to assess the quality of sellers service/product by analyzing the customer feedback. The evaluation of proposed model has been conducted on Russian carding forum and a web crawler was used to gather the conversation stuff from the forum. A sentiment tree bank has been used and it was trained by using recursive neural tensor network on online review corpus. For evaluating the validity and effectiveness, two experiments were conducted in which proposed model was compared with Nave Bayes, KNN and SVM based models. This study has searched out the sellers who are highly rated for malicious services/products and the effectiveness of deep learning for recognizing these sellers. Results have been indicated that Deep learning techniques accomplish superior outcomes than the shallow classifiers and it was established that the carding sellers have fewer ratings than malware sellers. Table II , presenting the analysis of best approaches based on recursive neural network.