The Recurrent neural network (RNN)  is an influential model in language modeling because it doesnt represent the context of fixed-length that contaminate all history words . In this study  , the HBRNN (hierarchical bidirectional recurrent neural network) has been developed to extract the reviews of customers about different hotels in a complete and concise manner. To model the sequential long term information, HBRNN has used the terminology of RNN and the prediction process was done at review level by HBRNN. The experimental data was taken from DBS text mining Challenge 2015. HBRNN performance was improved through networks parameters along with the fine tuning and the model was compared with LSTM (long shot term memory) and BLSTM (Bidirectional LSTM). After performing the experiments, the evaluation recall, F1 scores and precision was made on highly biased data. The development, test set and train splits were used for comparing outcomes with benchmark systems, tenfold cross validation used to present the performance of HBRNN. The main challenges that was resolved is lack of online reviews with high quality and lack of high skewness in the reviewed data. Experimental Results on the dataset proved that HBRNN performed better than other methods. This model can be applied to other opinion mining activities which consists of huge data volume. This contribution  has been done to overcome the issue of dataset of Bangla as it is standard and large for SA (Sentiment Analysis) tasks. The issue has been resolved by providing a significant dataset for sentiment analysis of 10,000 BRBT (Bangla and Romanized Bangla Text). The Deep Recurrent model especially LSTM (Long Short Term Memory) was used to test the dataset by using two loss functions, i.e., binary and categorical cross-entropy. Data were gathered from different sites like YouTube, Face book, Twitter and others. The experiments were conducted to prepare dataset of one mark for another (and the other way around) to investigate the fact whether it contributes towards the better outcomes. This author  proposed a sequence model to focus on the embedding of reviews having temporal nature toward products as these reviews had less focus in existing studies. The combination of gated recurrent units with recurrent neural network is used to learn dispersed representations of products and users. For sentiment classification these representations fed into machine learning classifier. The approach was evaluated on three datasets collected from Yelp and IMDB. Each review labeled according to rating score. To train the network the back-propagation algorithm with Adam stochastic optimization method has been used. Results show sequence modeling of dispersed product and user representation learning improves the performance sentiment classification of document-level and the proposed approach achieves high-tech results on the benchmark datasets. The result of proposed model compared with many baselines including recursive neural networks, user product neural network, word2vec, paragraph vector and algorithm JMARS. We have also made an analysis of some approaches based on Recurrent Neural Network and this analysis is presented in tabular form in Table IV .