Sentiments contains a variety of featured values like tri-grams and bi-grams by means of polarities and combinations. So sentiments are being assessed both as negative and positive aspects through the numerous support vector machines, by using training algorithms. The neural networks are implemented in sentiment analysis to compute belongingness of labels. To help out data extraction at context level the conditional dependencies among several edges and nodes of acyclic graph operated by Bayesian networks are used. By optimizing words and sentences, learning and data accuracy can be attained on social media platform. At word root level, data tokenization is used to produce negative and positive aspects of data. Techniques are being used to decrease the errors in sentiment analysis to attain higher level of precision in data for social media.  2) Sentiment Analysis as multidisciplinary Field: The sentiment analysis is multidisciplinary field, because it includes numerous fields such as computational linguistics, information retrieval, semantics, natural language processing, artificial intelligence and machine learning  . The classification for the approaches of sentiment analysis can be done in three extraction levels a) feature or aspect level; b) document level; and c) sentence level  . 3) Techniques for Sentiment Analysis: Sentiment analysis relies on two types of techniques, i.e., lexicon based and machine learning based techniques  . a) Machine learning based techniques: This type of techniques are implemented by extracting the sentences and aspect levels. The features consist of Parts of Speech (POS) tags, n-grams, bi-grams, uni-grams and bag-of-words. Machine learning contains three flavors at sentence and aspect, i.e., Nave Bayes, Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Maximum Entropy. is capable of automation and can handle huge amount of data therefore these are very suitable for sentiment analysis.  .