The ScandSum research network (ScandSum 2003) has helped coordinate Nordic research on summarization, especially for the Scandinavian languages. Such a research effort was badly needed, since at present there is a lack of usable tools for summarization targeted at those languages. In today’s information society, the overflow of textual information, especially on the Internet and increasingly delivered through mobile devices, makes summarization useful and sometimes indispensable. The current state of the art is primarily based on extraction techniques which attempt to identify and retain the most relevant sentences in a text. The resulting extract should ideally contain enough information to satisfy the user’s needs and at the same time it should not contain any redundant or superfluous information. The user s needs can roughly be described as either indicative (topic of the text) or informative (central information in the text). Spotting keywords and named entities in a text are useful for attaining these goals. A further requirement for a summary is that it should ideally be a fluent text without any gaps that could be misleading to the reader. In particular, missing antecedents of anaphors may cause problems. Therefore, anaphor resolution techniques may help to increase the quality of summaries. It is difficult to formulate what makes an ideal summary. Therefore any effort at automatic summarization must carefully assess user s needs. Research will clearly benefit from an analysis of human summarization and a comparative evaluation of machine generated summaries. Further reading about the research field can be found in (Mani & Maybury 1999)