A simple type of recursive neural network that is used heavily in NLP is the recurrent neural network (RNN) BIB2763403 BIB52098500 ]. An RNN, in its simplest form, has an edge on a node, usually in a hidden layer, that feeds back to itself, as seen in Figure 3a . To demonstrate easily the creation of a chain like structure, which allows the network to remember the previous input in ordered sequences of input, an RNN can be visualized in an unrolled manner If an entire data sequence is known prior to computation beginning, RNNs can also operate over the reverse sequence of the data. Bidirectional networks such as (e) utilize two RNNs working in opposite directions and then combine the outputs. [ Medsker and Jain 2001] , such as shown in Figure 3c . Since much of NLP is dependent on the order of words or other elements such as phonemes or sentences, it is extremely useful to have memory of the previous elements when processing new ones BIB15076873 BIB17048224 BIB14850173 . Sometimes, backwards dependencies exist, i.e., correct processing of some words may depend on words that follow. These dependencies may be better captured if sentences are analyzed in the backwards direction. Thus, it may be beneficial to look at sentences in both directions, forwards and backwards, using two RNN cells, and combine their outputs. This arrangement of RNNs is called a bidirectional RNN and is shown in Figure 3e . Since an RNN's memory of data early in the chain gradually decays, later outputs may be erroneous if they rely heavily on early information. Examining chains in both directions counteracts this, as the RNNs focus separately on early data and late data. Note that all information must be present prior to computation in order to view it in reverse, preventing the use of bidirectional RNNs in some live applications such as speech processing programs. It has also been noticed that sometimes it leads to a better final representation if instead of having one RNN cell, there is a sequence of RNN cells, one after the other. This may allow the effect of an input to linger longer than a single RNN cell, allowing for longer-term effects. This setup of sequential RNN cells is called an RNN stack BIB2843869 BIB18271205 . Of course, there can be more than two stacked RNN cells as well, as shown in Figures 3b and 3d. 2.2.4 Long Short-Term Memory Networks. The internal workings of nodes in RvNNs (RNNs included) may vary. Single neurons may be used or complex networks may be used. One highly engineered RNN is the long short-term memory (LSTM) network BIB3356463 BIB1915014 . In LSTMs, the recursive nodes are composed of several individual neurons (or in some variants small ANNs) connected in a manner designed to retain specific information. Whereas generic RNNs with single neurons feeding back to themselves technically have some memory of long passed results, these results are diluted with each successive iteration. Furthermore, each of the elements of the results are remembered equally. Oftentimes, it is important to remember fully information from the distant past, while at the same time, other very recent information may be of zero importance. By using LSTM blocks in RNNs to form LSTM networks, this important information can be retained almost indefinitely while irrelevant information can be forgotten. However, if information is disregarded, it cannot be recovered, even if its presence is desired later. Current research looks to correct this problem, possibly by retaining larger amounts of data and Fig. 4 . Long Short-Term Memory Network. In this network, the input is concatenated with the previous output and is then distributed to an activation node and to three sigmoid nodes followed by gate nodes. Depending on the outputs of the sigmoid nodes, the gate nodes choose whether or not to allow information to pass through. These gates control i) the input, ii) the recurrent internal state, and iii) the output. simply altering which parts of it particular examples are attentive to . In another line of work, a slightly simpler variant of the LSTM, called the Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), has been shown to perform as well as or better than standard LSTMs in many NLP tasks BIB5201925 . 2.2.5 Attention Mechanisms, Residual Connections, and Dropout. A number of other forms of artificial neural networks exist BIB11715509 ], however, those listed above are the most commonly used in current natural language processing research. Furthermore, many neural networks, including some mentioned in the discussions that follow, contain features from multiple types of networks. In order to understand some of these networks, one must understand some additional components and methods used in neural networks. One such component is the attention mechanism. For many tasks such as machine translation, text summarization, or image or video captioning, the output is in textual form. (This differs from many tasks in which text is input and a classification decision must be made.) Typically, this is done through the use of encoder-decoder pairs. An encoding ANN is used to produce a vector of a particular length and a decoding ANN is used to return text based on this vector. Since the vector must be of this specified length in order to be fed into the decoder, the encoder must also generate a vector of this length. While RNNs produce an output at each time step, the number of time steps is variable. However, ideally speaking, the final output will account for all inputs. This output will be a fixed size, and therefore can be passed into the decoder. The problem with this scheme, which is shown in Figure 5a , is that the RNN is forced to encode an entire sequence to a finite length vector, without regards to whether or not any of the inputs are more important than others. A robust solution to this is that of attention. The first noted use of an attention mechanism was that of . This approach used a dense layer for annotated weighting of an RNN's hidden state, allowing the network to learn what to pay attention to in accordance with the current hidden state and annotation. Such a mechanism is present in Figure 5b . Many variants of the mechanism have been introduced, popular ones including convolutional BIB1918428 , intra-temporal [Paulus et al. 2017] , gated  , and self-attention BIB13756489 . Deep neural networks are usually trained via backpropagation BIB62245742 . This method computes the error at the output nodes, and makes updates to weights on all edges connecting to them from lower level nodes. The backward propagation of error and correction of edge weights happens layer by layer in a similar manner, all the way back to the input layer. In increasingly deep networks, the gradients used to correct for error often vanish or explode by the time early layers are reached. BIB206457500 ]. This can be somewhat mitigated by choosing activation functions, such as the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) BIB15539264 , which do not exhibit regions that are arêtically steep or have bosonically small gradients. Also in response to this issue, as well as others , residual connections are often used. Such connections are simply those that skip layers (usually one). If used in every alternating layer, this cuts in half the number of layers through which the gradient must backpropagate. Such a network is known as a residual network (ResNet). A number of variants exist, including Highway Networks [Srivastava et al. 2015] and DenseNets BIB9433631 . Another important method used in training ANNs is dropout. In dropout, some nodes are deactivated, usually randomly, for each training batch (small set of examples), varying which nodes are deactivated each batch. This forces the network to distribute its memory across multiple paths, helping with generalization and lessening the likelihood of overfitting to the training data. For simplicity in training, this is usually implemented via dropout layers, which are simply single feedforward layers (generally fully connected) in which all the dropped nodes are contained. Dropout rates between 0 and 1 designate the proportion of nodes dropped during each training batch.