Parsing examines how different words and phrases relate to each other within a sentence. There are at least two distinct forms of parsing: constituency parsing and dependency parsing  . In constituency parsing, phrasal constituents are extracted from a sentence in a hierarchical fashion. Phrases are identified, which in turn form larger phrases, eventually culminating in complete sentences. Dependency parsing on the other hand looks solely at the relationships between pairs of individual words. Most recent uses of deep learning in natural language parsing have been in the area of dependency parsing, within which there exists another major divide in types of solutions. Graph-based parsing constructs a number of parse trees that are then searched to find the correct one. Most graph-based approaches are generative models, in which a formal grammar, based on the natural language, is used to construct the trees  . Without such an approach, an immense number of trees would be produced, many of them being totally illogical. More popular in recent years than graph-based approaches have been transition-based approaches. In these approaches, only one parse tree is usually constructed. While a number of modifications have been proposed, the standard method of transition-based dependency parsing is to create a buffer containing all of the words in the sentence and stack containing only the ROOT label. Words are then pushed onto the stack, where connections, known as arcs, are made between the top two items. These arcs can either be right-arcs or left-arcs, depending on whether the top word (which is further right in the sentence) is dependent on the bottom word (which is further left), or the bottom word is dependent on the top. Once dependencies have been determined, words are popped off the stack. The process continues until the buffer is empty and only the ROOT label remains on the stack. Three major approaches are used to regulate the conditions in which each of the previously described actions takes place. In the arc-standard approach  BIB14358598 , all dependents are connected to a word before the word is connected to its parent. In the arc-eager approach  BIB14358598 , words are connected to their parents as soon as possible, regardless of whether or not their children are all connected to them. Finally, in the Swap-Lazy approach ], the arc-standard approach is modified to allow swapping of positions on the stack. This makes the graphing of non-projective edges possible. 3.3.1 Early Neural Parsing. Compared to many areas of NLP, parsing has only recently been introduced to the power of deep learning. One early application of deep learning to natural language processing, that of Scoher et al. [2013a; , included the use of RNNs with probabilistic context-free grammars (PCFGs) BIB16432742 BIB59759783 BIB62304080 , allowing for semantically different phrases to be parsed differently, even if their part-of-speech tags were identical. As far as the authors are aware, the first neural model to achieve state-of-the-art performance in parsing was that of BIB17048295 . Such performance was achieved on the Penn Treebank for both labeled attachment score (LAS) and unlabeled attachment score (UAS) by using an Inside-Out Recursive Neural Network, which used two vector representations (an inner and an outer) to allow both top-down and bottom-up flows of data. BIB14223 created an LSTM with an attention mechanism in a syntactic constituency parser, which they tested on data from domains different from those of the test data (the English Web Treebank BIB11108420 and the Question Treebank BIB8317576 ] as opposed to the Wall Street Journal portion of the Penn Treebank BIB252796 , showing that neural models can generalize between domains. Embeddings were first used in dependency parsing by BIB18584794 , laying the path for most recent attempts at natural language parsing. This approach used an RNN to create a directed acyclic graph. While this model did produce results within 2% of the state of the art (on the Wall Street Journal portion of the CoNLL 2008 Shared Task dataset BIB6534839 ), by the time it reached the end of a sentence, it seemed to have difficulty remembering phrases from early in the sentence. 3.3.2 Transition-Based Dependency Parsing. The basis for most major recent research in parsing is the work of BIB11616343 , who pushed the state of the art in both UAS and LAS on both English and Chinese datasets, scoring 92.2% UAS on the English Penn Treebank. They accomplished this by using a simple feedforward neural network as the decision maker in a transition-based parser. By doing so they were able to subvert the problem of sparsity persistent in the statistical models that were being heavily used. While they achieved state-of-the-art results, they noted the simplicity of their model as well as a number of areas in which it could be improved upon. The first of such areas was that of the search mechanism employed by the model. Chen and Manning used a simple greedy search, which was replaced by with a beam search. By doing this, they achieved a significant improvement, nearing the performance of the new state of the art. In addition to using beam search, improved upon Chen and Manning's work by using a deeper neural network with residual connections and a perceptron layer placed after the softmax layer. Furthermore, they were able to train on significantly more examples than typical by utilizing tri-training , a process in which potential data samples are fed to two other parsers, and those on which both of the parsers agree upon are used for training the primary parser. This approach became the state of the art with respective UAS and LAS scores of 94.26% and 92.41% on the Penn Treebank. further extended this work by testing several similar models on the Wall Street Journal dataset, the Web English Treebank dataset, and the Question Treebank data, as well as datasets from CoNLL 2009 BIB9210201 ] for a number of languages. State-of-the-art performance was achieved in both UAS and LAS on the three English datasets as well as for most of the languages tested from CoNLL 2009. Another model was produced using an LSTM instead of a feedforward network . Unlike previous models, this model was given knowledge of the entire buffer and the entire stack and had knowledge of the entire history of transition decisions. This allowed for better predictions, generating state-of-the-art UAS and LAS scores of 93.1% and 90.9%, respectively on the Stanford Dependency Treebank BIB3542573 , as well as state-of-the-art results on the CTB5 Chinese dataset  . Lastly, BIB2952144 used a feedforward network with global normalization on a number of tasks including part-of-speech tagging, sentence compression, and dependency parsing. State-of-the-art results were obtained on all tasks, including reaching a UAS score of 94.61% on the Wall Street Journal dataset. Notably, their model required significantly less computation than comparable models to achieve these results. At the time of writing of this survey, the state of the art is defined by another such transition-based dependency parser . Much like the work of Stenentorp [2013] , this model uses an alternative algorithm to produce directed acyclic graphs, rather than simple trees. In addition to the typical stack and buffer used in transition-based parsing, the algorithm employs a deque. This allows for the representation of multi-parented words, which although rare in English, are common in many natural languages. Furthermore, it allows for multiple children of the ROOT label. In addition to producing said graphs, this work is novel in its use of two new LSTM-based techniques: Bi-LSTM Subtraction and Incremental Tree-LSTM. Bi-LSTM Subtraction builds off of previous work BIB2412277  ] to represent the buffer as a subtraction of the vectors from the head and tail of the LSTM, in addition to using an additional LSTM to represent the deque. Incremental Tree-LSTM is an extension of Tree-LSTM BIB3033526 , modified for directed acyclic graphs instead of trees, by connecting children to parents incrementally, rather than connecting all children to a parent simultaneously. Both techniques were found to improve performance, and the model exercising both achieved the best published scores for fourteen of the sixteen evaluation metrics used on SemEval-2015 Task 18 (English)  and SemEval-2016 Task 9 (Chinese)  . 3.3.3 Generative Dependency and Constituent Parsing. While transition-based dependency parsing still remains successful, currently defining the state of the art, improvements have recently been attained by applying deep learning to constituency parsing and generative models. proposed a model that used recurrent neural network grammars for parsing and language modeling. Whereas most approaches take a bottom-up approach to parsing, this took a top-down approach, taking as input the full sentence in addition to the current parse tree. This allowed the sentence to be viewed as a whole, rather than simply allowing local phrases within it to be considered. While not attaining state-of-the-art results in all of parsing, this model achieved the best results in English generative parsing as well as in single sentence language modeling. It also attained results close to the best in Chinese generative parsing. The first model to achieve state-of-the-art results using a deep learning approach to generative parsing was that of Choe and Charniak [2016] . Parsing was treated as a language modeling problem, and an LSTM was used to assign probabilities to the parse trees. Using this approach, UAS and LAS scores of 95.9% and 94.1%, respectively, were achieved on the Penn Treebank. BIB29764642 considered both of these models and tested them to determine whether the power of these models came from the reranking process or simply from the combined power of two models. They found that while using one parser for producing candidate trees and another for ranking them was superior to a single parser approach, combining two parsers explicitly was preferable still. They used two parsers to both select the candidates and rerank them, achieving state-of-the-art results. They extended this model to use three parsers, achieving even better results, with an F1 score on the Penn Treebank of 93.4%. Finally, an ensemble of eight such models (using two parsers) was constructed and achieved the best results (94.25% F1 on Penn Treebank) prior to the model proposed by .