Information extraction is the process of using algorithms to extract explicit or implicit information from text. The outputs of systems using these algorithms vary across implementations, but often the extracted data and the relationships within it are saved in relational databases  . Early methods included the use of simplistic information classification, pattern matching, and grammar methods to create rule-based approaches  BIB62905880 . Current information retrieval systems use machine learning algorithms of various kinds-supervised and unsupervised. Commonly extracted information includes named entities and relations, events and their participants, temporal information, and tuples of facts. 4.1.1 Named Entity Recognition. Named entity recognition (NER) refers to the identification of proper nouns as well as information such as dates, times, prices, and product IDs. Until recently, support vector machines BIB7138354 ] and conditional random fields BIB277918 were the most commonly used approaches for NER. The multi-task approach of BIB351666 included the task, although no results were reported. In their approach, a simple feedforward network was used, having a context with a fixed sized window around each word. Presumably, this made it difficult to capture long-distance relations between words. Furthermore, it used word embeddings as input, rendering it unable to leverage explicit character level features. Long short-term memory was first used for named entity recognition by BIB1160080 . The model, which was ahead of its time, had a small network due to the lack of available computing power at the time. Additionally, sophisticated numeric vector models for words were not yet available. Results obtained were slightly better than the baseline for English and much better than the baseline for German. Dos BIB9150889 used a deep neural network architecture, known as CharWNN, which jointly used word-level and character-level inputs to perform sequential classification. Before being tested for NER, this exact network, with the same hyper-parameters and without any hand-crafted features, was used effectively for language-independent POS tagging [Dos BIB15874232 . Dos BIB9150889 performed a number of experiments using the HAREM I annotated Portuguese corpus BIB562554 , and the SPA CoNLL2002 annotated Spanish corpus  . For the Portuguese corpus, CharWNN outperformed the previous state-of-the-art system by 7.9 points in the F 1 score across ten named entity classes. It also achieved state-of-the-art performance on the Spanish corpus. The authors noted that when used alone, neither word embeddings nor character level embeddings worked as well as when used jointly. This revalidated a fact long-known in the NLP community: Joint use of word-level and character-level features is important to effective performance of named entity recognition. BIB6300165 were also inspired by the work of Collobert et alii. They used a bidirectional LSTM along with a character-level CNN resembling those used by dos BIB9150889 and BIB14584850 , who used it for German POS-tagging. Without using any private lexicons, detailed information about linked entities, or elaborate hand-crafted features, they were able to achieve F 1 scores of 91.62 and 86.28, respectively, on the CoNLL-2003 [Tjong  and OntoNotes BIB8508974 BIB14515377 ] datasets, forwarding the state of the art. BIB6042994 developed an architecture based on bidirectional LSTMs and conditional random fields. The model used both character-level inputs and word embeddings. The inputs were combined and then fed to a bidirectional LSTM, whose outputs were in turn fed to a layer that performed conditional random field (CRF) computations BIB277918 . The model, when trained using dropout, obtained state-of-the-art performance in both German and Spanish. The LSTM-CRF model was also very close in both English and Dutch. The main claim of this study was that state-of-the-art results were achieved without the use any hand-engineered features or gazetteers.