A major problem with statistical language models was their inability to deal well with synonyms or out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words. While they could predict the re-occurrence of word sets that were present in the training corpus, they had difficulty predicting new sets of words; for example, a set of words from the training corpus in which one word was replaced with a synonym or a similar word with a different meaning (e.g. car and truck or red and blue). Progress was made in solving these problems with the introduction of the neural language model BIB2852525 ]. While much of NLP took another decade to begin to utilize ANNs heavily, the LM community immediately took advantage of them, and continued to develop sophisticated models, many of which were summarized by DeMulder et al. [2015] . Not only do they allow for the prediction of synonymous words, they also allow for modeling the relationships between words [Mikolov et al. 2013a,b] . The word vectors with numeric components, obtained by language modeling techniques are called embeddings. Typically, word embeddings have between 50 and 300 dimensions. An overused example is that of the distributed representations of the words king, queen, man, and woman. If one takes the embedding vectors for each of these words, mathematics can be performed to obtain highly sensible results. If the vectors representing these words are respectively represented as ì k, ì q, ì m, and ì w, it can be observed that ì k − ì q ≈ ì m − ì w, which is extremely intuitive to human reasoning. 3.1.3 Evaluation of Language Models. While neural networks have certainly made breakthroughs in the LM field, it is often rather hard to quantify improvements. In some applications such as speech recognition or machine translation, metrics such as word error rate (WER) can be used. (Word error rate is the fraction of actual output words not correctly matching the desired output words.) However, typically it is desirable to evaluate language models independently of the applications in which they appear. A number of metrics have been proposed, but no perfect solution has yet been found BIB1995619 BIB27996838 BIB60842487 . The most commonly used metric is perplexity, which is the inverse probability of a test set normalized by the number of words. Perplexity is a reasonable measurement for LMs trained on the same datasets, but when they are trained on different vocabularies, the metric becomes less meaningful. Luckily, there are several benchmark datasets that are used widely in the field, allowing for reasonable comparison. Two such datasets are the Penn Treebank (PTB) BIB252796 , and more recently, in order to allow for comparison of large models that require extensive amounts of training data, the Billion Word Benchmark BIB14136307 ].