Networks. Some networks contain layers in which the nodes receive input from only some of the nodes in previous layers, and therefore are not fully connected. One such type of network is the convolutional neural network (CNN) BIB41312633 BIB14542261 ], built upon Fukashima's [1980; BIB2357880 neocognitron. Deriving their name from the convolution operation in mathematics and signal processing, convolutional neural networks use an assortment of different fully-enumerated functions, known as filters, to augment the data in varying ways, allowing for simultaneous analysis of different features in the data BIB5556470  . The structure is inspired by the biological neural networks (BNNs) found in the visual cortex  . A single neuron receives signals from a number of co-located rods and cones (visual receptors in the eye) in an area known as that neuron's receptive field. The neuron, in essence, performs a function on the received signals to identify if a particular low-level feature is present in its receptive field. Likewise, a number of other neurons with identical or similar receptive fields perform other operations on the stimuli to identify other features. Further neurons receive signals from these neurons as well as neurons with different receptive fields, and use this information to identify higher level features. Consequently, CNNs are used extensively in image and video processing. A simple CNN architecture is show in Fig. 2a . Due to some of the advantages they provide, they have also found use in a number of other fields, including speech and natural language processing BIB15874232 BIB1306065  BIB12873739 . Two of the largest advantages of convolutional networks are their ability to share weights and their ability to account for poorly processed data  . Since many nodes in a CNN are looking for the same features as other neurons in their layer, just in different receptive fields, it makes sense that they would use the same functions (i.e., the same weights for their inputs). Therefore, for example, instead of having to train one million neurons to identify one hundred different features in ten thousand different regions, one only has to train one hundred different neurons, which can then be used ten thousand times each. This reduces the scope of the problem immensely (in this example by a factor of ten thousand), and with it the training time. Another appealing feature of CNNs is their ability to account for data that may not be uniformly or systematically formatted. Since CNNs are capable of learning features that may be present in different regions of the input data, rather than relying on certain features being present in particular locations, less preprocessing is required. This allows CNNs to identify objects in images no matter where in the image the object occurs or what proportion of the frame is occupied by the object. Likewise, it allows linguistic features to be identified no matter where in a sample text they occur. This allows for processing of diverse forms of word morphology, sentence syntax, and other characteristics that may not always follow the same structure BIB1306065 . Often, it is not important precisely where certain features occur, but rather whether or not they appear in particular localities. Therefore, pooling operations, such as that show in Figure 2b , can be used to minimize the size of feature maps (the outputs of the convolutional filters). The most common pooling operation is k-max pooling, in which the k largest values within the pool are retained and all others discarded. The sizes of such pools are generally small in order to prevent the loss of too much precision. As pooling can significantly reduce the number of locations to be examined by the following layers, its use can dramatically decrease the number of parameters in a network, leading to substantial improvements in training times. Convolutional neural networks usually consist of multiple convolutional and pooling layers followed by several fully-connected layers.