Another classic application for natural language processing is text classification, or the assignment of free-text documents to predefined classes. Document classification has numerous applications. Many techniques have produced valuable results on this task-the Rocchio algorithm used in information retrieval  ], support vector machines BIB2427083 ], decision trees BIB8268690 , and the focus of this section, deep neural networks, among them.  was the first to use pretrained word vectors in a CNN for sentence-level classification tasks. Kim's work with classification was motivating, and showed that simple CNNs, with one convolutional layer followed by a softmax layer with dropout, could achieve excellent results on multiple benchmarks using little hyperparameter tuning. The CNN models proposed by Kim were able to improve upon the state of the art on 4 out of 7 different tasks cast as sentence classification, including sentiment analysis and question classification. BIB5079983 later showed that networks that employ a large number of convolutional neural networks work well for document classification. Instead of using various sized convolutions, their architecture used only convolutions with a window size of three. A novel approach proposed by used a hybrid architecture combining a deep belief network BIB2309950 and softmax regression BIB9166388 ]. A deep belief network is a feedforward network where pairs of hidden layers are designed to resemble the restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) proposed by BIB533055 . Restricted Bolzmann Machines are trained using unsupervised learning and are designed to increase or decrease dimensionality of data. This is achieved by making passes over the data using forward and backward propagation many times until a minimum error is found over an energy-loss-based function. This process was independent of the labeled or classification portion of the task, and was therefore initially trained without the softmax regression output layer. Once both sections of the architecture were pretrained, they were then combined and trained like a regular deep neural net with backpropagation and quasi-Newton methods BIB123487779 ].