A convolutional neural network that was used recently in language modeling was one in which the pooling layers were replaced with fully-connected layers  . These layers allowed the feature maps to be reduced to lower dimensional spaces just as the pooling layers usually do. However, whereas any references to location of such features are lost in pooling layers, fully-connected layers somewhat retain this information. Several variations of CNNs were tested, all incorporating this characteristic. In total, three different architectures were implemented: a multilayer perceptron CNN (MLPConv) in which the filters were not simply linear, but instead small MLPs BIB16636683 ]; a multilayer CNN (ML-CNN) in which multiple convolutional layers are stacked on top of each other; and a combination of these networks called COM, in which kernel sizes for filters varied (in this case they were three and five). All of the networks were tested on three different datasets: the Penn Treebank, Europarl-NC [Bojar et al. [n. d.] ], and ukWaC  ]. The results of this study showed that stacking convolutional layers was actually detrimental in language modeling, but that both MLPConv and COM were effective at reducing the perplexity on each of the datasets tested. Furthermore, combining MLPConv with the varying kernel sizes of COM provided even better results, achieving a perplexity of ninety-one on the Penn Treebank. Analysis was performed by the researchers, showing that the networks learned specific patterns of words, such as, "as . . . as". Lastly, this study showed that CNNs can be used to capture long term dependencies in sentences. Closer words were found to be of greatest importance, but words located farther away were found to be of some significance as well. Words as far as sixteen positions away were considered. 3.1.6 Character Aware Neural Language Models. While most CNNs used in NLP receive words (or word embeddings) as input, some recent networks have analyzed character level input instead. One such network is that of BIB686481 , which unlike previous networks that accepted character level input BIB2838374 , accepted only such input, rather than combining it with word embeddings. A CNN was used to process the character level input in order to provide representations of the words. In a similar manner as word embeddings usually are, these representations were then fed into an encoder-decoder pair composed of a highway network (a gated network resembling an LSTM) [Srivastava et al. 2015] and an LSTM. They trained the network on the English Penn Treebank, as well as on datasets for Czech, German, Spanish, French, Russian, and Arabic. The Arabic data was from the News-Commentary corpus and all of the other data was from the 2013 ACL Workshop on Machine Translation (both the small and large datasets). For every non-English language except Russian, the network outperformed previously published results BIB2838374 in both the large and small datasets. For Russian, better results were achieved on the small dataset, but not the large. On the Penn Treebank, results were produced on par with the existing state of the art BIB17719760 , achieving a perplexity of 78.9 (compared to 78.4). However, the network had only 19 million trainable parameters, which is considerably lower than others, and was handicapped by the number of words marked as unknown in the Penn Treebank. Since the network focused on morphological similarities produced by character level analysis, it was more capable than previous models of handling words that were rarely seen in the corpus. Analysis showed that without the use of highway layers, many words had nearest neighbors that were orthographically similar (spelled similarly), but not necessarily semantically similar. The addition of highway layers (which were used in the highest performing network) seemed to solve this problem. Additionally, the network was capable of recognizing misspelled words or words not spelled in the standard way (e.g. looooook instead of look) and of recognizing out of vocabulary words. The analysis also showed that the network was capable of identifying prefixes, roots, and suffixes, as well as understanding hyphenated words, making it an extremely robust model. BIB260422 tested a number of architectures including some mentioned above, and a few others producing character level outputs BIB14136307 BIB7454685  BIB3330295 . Whereas many of these models had only been tested on small scale language modeling, this study tested them on large scale language modeling, testing them with the Billion Word Benchmark. The most effective model, achieving a state-of-the-art (for single models) perplexity of 30.0 with 1.04 billion trainable parameters (compared to a previous best by a single model of 51.3 with 20 billion parameters BIB14136307 ), was a large LSTM using a character level CNN as an input network. The best performance, however, was achieved using an ensemble (group of parallel networks whose outputs are averaged) of ten LSTMs. The perplexity of this ensemble, 23.7, far surpassed the previous state-of-the-art ensemble  , which had a perplexity of 41.0.