Image captioning is unique in that it combines the fields of natural language processing and computer vision, encoding information from images and decoding it into text. While the encoding process is out of the scope of this survey, the decoding process, as well as, to some degree, holistic models are briefly discussed here. The automatic captioning of images has been attempted for many years, gaining popularity following the work of BIB12561212 . The introduction of neural networks to the field has led to significant advancements in recent years. The first neural models were template based BIB10116609 and search based [Devlin et al. 2015a,b] . In the prior, aspects of images were recognized and the different words describing these aspects were then combined in standardized grammatical templates. In the latter, images were compared with those in a database and were each assigned the caption of the most similar image. The epitome of neural captioning models, Google's Neural Image Caption (NIC) algorithm BIB1169492 , used a deep CNN, trained for image classifications purposes, as the encoder and an LSTM network for decoding. BIB8517067 developed an algorithm capturing alignments between image regions and corresponding segments of words. BIB6918332 addressed the ability to include unseen words in captions with the Deep Compositional Captioning (DCC) model, composed of a lexical classifier and a language model working together. introduced image attention, feeding the decoder with dynamic vector representations of the most visually salient attributes. BIB3120635 developed a semantic attentional model by combining top-down and bottom-up image features in a feedback process injected to the LSTMbased language model. proposed an adaptive attentional model that included a sentinel gate within the LSTM architecture in the decoder, dictating whether to consider the encoding or to generate the next word using the language model alone. BIB206594923 proposed the use of reinforcement learning to train a deep neural model for image captioning. To the best knowledge of the authors, the highest performer on the vision-to-language problem, at the time of writing, uses regional attention and scene-specific contexts BIB206766566 . The algorithm segments a query image into spatial regions at a multi-scale level. Given a binary classifier, the semantic concepts captured in the image regions are considered salient for the algorithm when they are semantically meaningful (they relate to high level concepts), primitive, and contextually rich (they have dependency on other nearby regions). Simultaneously, a scene context vector is computed for the whole image. The addition of the scene vector (what the image topic is about) provides extra support to the LSTM architecture as it helps in choosing likely words given a certain image context, or in rejecting unlikely words given the same context. An extension of image captioning is video captioning ]. The recently emerging task is treated nearly identically, analyzing a number of frames rather than a single image BIB485828 . The frames are combined between the standard encoder and decoder using (a) recurrent layer(s) BIB59605920  . Recent approaches use hierarchical recurrent networks to perform this task BIB206595494 BIB3867284 . These networks implement recurrent layers over several frames, and then implement another such layer over the final outputs of the previous layer, reducing the number of connections to a fraction inversely proportional to the number of frames captured by each recurrent implementation in the previous layer. This significantly decreases the number of units through which gradients must be backpropagated. One novel approach BIB9946644 ] utilized attention along with 3D convolutions. Future work will surely integrate acoustic processing for better captioning and more extensive tasks such as summarizing movies.