One way to test the efficacy of an approach to computing semantics is to see if two similar phrases, sentences or documents, judged by humans to have similar meaning also are judged similarly by a program. A series of workshops called SemEval have been conducted annually from 1998 to date to encourage research in approaches to semantic computing. Comparing the semantic similarity of two sentences has been a staple contest in SemEval contests, and papers published in other venues. BIB4497054 proposed two CNNs to perform a semantic comparison task. The first model, ARC-I, inspired by BIB9095914 , used a "Siamese" network, in which two CNNs sharing weights evaluated two sentences in parallel. In the second network, connections were placed between the two, allowing for sharing before the final states of the CNNs. Three "multiple choice" experiments were performed, testing English sentence completion, responding to Chinese tweets, and comparing English sentence meaning. The approach outperformed a number of existing models. Building on prior work BIB4497054 BIB1306065 BIB6979578 ], Yin and Schütze [2015] proposed a Bi-CNN-MI (MI for multigranular interaction features), consisting of a pretrained CNN sentence model, a CNN interaction model, and a logistic regressor. Following Hu et al., they used a "Siamese" network, however, it was modified by the use of the Dynamic CNNs proposed by Kalchbrenner et al. (described in Section 3.4.2) . Additionally, the feature maps from each level were used in the comparison process, rather than simply the top-level feature maps. They achieved state-of-the-art results on the Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus (MSRP) BIB52817936 BIB10181753 . also used a CNN to compare the semantic similarity of sentences. The network resembled that of Yin and Schütze, using two CNNs in parallel. The constructed feature maps were then compared using a "similarity measurement layer" followed by a fully-connected layer and then a log-softmax output layer. The windows used in the convolutional layers ranged in length from one to four. The network was trained and evaluated on three different datasets: MSRP, the Sentences Involving Compositional Knowledge (SICK) dataset BIB16404002 , and the Microsoft Video Paraphrase Corpus (MSRVID) BIB12549805 . State-of-the-art results were achieved on the first and the third, and nearly matched on the second. Ablation studies showed that a number of elements such as POS tags, multiple pooling operations, and multiple similarity metrics, as well as several other features, all contributed to the performance of the model. The state-of-the-art network that generated superior results to the model proposed by He et al. on the SICK dataset was a model concocted using an RvNN with LSTM-like nodes BIB3033526 , referred to by its designers as a Tree-LSTM. Two different variations were examined (a constituency-based model and a dependency-based model) and tested on both the SICK dataset and the Stanford Sentiment Treebank BIB990233 ]. The constituency-based model achieved state-of-the-art results on the Stanford Sentiment Treebank and the dependency-based model achieved state-of-the-art results on SICK. He et al. presented another model [2016] , which outperformed that of Tai et al. on SICK. The model formed a matrix of the two sentences being compared before applying a "similarity focus layer" and then passing the information into a nineteen-layer CNN followed by dense layers with a softmax output. The similarity focus layer matched semantically similar pairs of words from the input sentences and applied weights to the matrix locations representing the relations between the words in each pair. In addition to testing on the SICK dataset, they tested on MSRVID, SemEval 2014 Task 10 [ BIB11650107 , WikiQA BIB1373518 , and TreeQA  ]. State-of-the-art results were attained on all of the above.