The core issues of NLP are those issues that are inherently present in any computational linguistic system. In order to perform translation, text summarization, image captioning, or any other linguistic task, there must be some understanding of the underlying language. This understanding can be broken down into four main areas: language modeling, morphology, parsing and semantics. Language modeling can be viewed in two ways. First, it is the task of determining which words follow which. By extension, however, this can be viewed as determining what words mean, as individual words are only weakly meaningful if not meaningless, deriving their full value only from their interactions with other words. Morphology is the study of how words themselves are formed. It considers the roots of words and how they evolve through the use of prefixes and suffixes, compounds, and other intraword devices, in order to display tense, gender, plurality, and a number of other linguistic constructs. Parsing considers the interactions between words. Specifically, it considers which words modify each other, and in which ways, forming constituents (i.e., phrases of various kinds), leading to a sentential structure. Encapsulating all of these is the area of semantics, which is the study of what words mean as a collective. It must take into account the meanings of the individual words and how they relate to and modify others, as well as the context these words appear in and some degree of world knowledge, i.e., "common sense". One can easily see that there is a significant amount of overlap between each of the areas discussed. Therefore, many of the models analyzed can be classified as belonging in multiple sections. As such, they are discussed in the most relevant sections with logical connections to those other places where they also interact.