Morphology is concerned with finding segments within single words, including roots and stems, prefixes, suffixes, and-in some languages-infixes. Affixes (prefixes, suffixes, or infixes) are used to overtly modify stems for gender, number, person, et cetera. Furthermore, different stems derived from the same roots usually convey separate but related concepts. BIB14276764 constructed a language model that was morphologically aware. An RvNN was used to model the morphological structure of English words. A neural language model was then placed on top of the RvNN. The model was trained on the WordSim-353 dataset [Finkelstein et al. 2001] and segmentation was performed using Morfessor  ]. An additional dataset of rare words was generated, as most available datasets do a poor job of modeling these words. Two models were constructed-one using context and one not. It was found that the model that was insensitive to context over-accounted for certain morphological structures. In particular, words with the same stem were clustered together, even if they were antonyms. The context sensitive model performed better, noting the relationships between the stems, but also accounting for other features such as the prefix "un". The model was also tested on several other popular datasets BIB372093 BIB145580646  , significantly outperforming previous embedding models on all. A good morphological analyzer is often important in the context of larger linguistic systems and other NLP tasks. As such, one recent study by Belinkov et al. [2017] examined the extent to which morphology was learned and utilized by a variety of neural machine translation models. In this study, a number of translation models were constructed, all translating from English to French, German, Czech, Arabic, or Hebrew. Encoders and decoders were LSTM-based models (some with attention mechanisms) or character aware CNNs, and the models were trained on the WIT 3 corpus BIB15924543  . The decoders were then replaced with part-of-speech (POS) taggers and morphological taggers, fixing the weights of the encoders to preserve the internal representations. The effects of the encoders were examined as were the effects of the decoders attached during training. The study concluded that the use of attention mechanisms decreases the performance of encoders, but increases the performance of decoders. Furthermore, it was found that character-aware models are superior to others for learning morphology and that the output language affects the performance of the encoders. Specifically, the more morphologically rich the output language, the worse the representations created by the encoders. The effects of character-level models have also been further examined in machine translation BIB13495961 , as well as in a number of other fields such as semantics  and parsing BIB11913192 . Their use has, however, been most prevalent in language modeling BIB2838374 BIB686481 , as previously mentioned in Section 3.1.6. BIB15043144 analyzed a new morphological language model for unsegmented languages such as Japanese. They constructed an RNN-based model with a beam search decoder and trained it on both an automatically labeled BIB13951607 corpus and on a new manually labeled corpus which they presented. The model performed a number of tasks jointly, including morphological analysis, POS tagging, and lemmatization. The model was then tested on the Kyoto Text Corpus BIB13012136 and the Kyoto University Web Document Leads Corpus BIB6443069 , outperforming all baselines on all tasks.