Numerous other applications of natural language processing exist including grammar correction, as seen in word processors, and author mimicking, which, given sufficient data, generates text replicating the style of a particular writer. Many of these applications are infrequently used, understudied, or not yet exposed to deep learning. However, the area of sentiment analysis should be noted, as it is becoming increasingly popular and utilizing deep learning. In large part a semantic task, it is the extraction of a writer's sentiment-their positive, negative, or neutral inclination towards some subject or idea  . Applications are varied, including product research, futures prediction, social media analysis, and classification of spam BIB148721796 BIB5936694 . The current state of the art uses an ensemble including both LSTMs and CNNs BIB414569 . This section has provided a number of select examples of the applied usages of deep learning in natural language processing. Countless studies have been conducted in these and similar areas, chronicling the ways in which deep learning has facilitated the successful use of natural language in a wide variety of applications. Only a minuscule fraction of such work has been referred to in this survey. Initial work in many application domains often comes from academia, but then the ideas are frequently adopted, as well as expanded upon, in industry by organizations big and small, established and startup. Published academic work, as well as commercial work, is likely to continue apace, if not faster, in the years to come.