While the comparison of the meanings of sentences and phrases is useful, it in large part relies on being able to calculate the meanings of individual sentences and phrases. This is a common theme in all of NLP. Extending from neural language modeling, which attempts to capture the meaning of words in vectors, sentence modeling attempts to capture the meaning of sentences in vectors. Taking this a step further are models, such as that of BIB2407601 , which attempt to model paragraphs or larger bodies of text in this way. While these are intriguing, there is still much work to be done on the phrase and sentence levels, which will be the focus of the remainder of this section. Kalchbrenner et al. [2014] generated representations of sentences using a dynamic convolutional neural network (DCNN), which used a number of different filters and dynamic k-max pooling layers to determine which features detected by those filters are most important. Due to the dynamic pooling, features of different types and lengths could be identified in sentences with varying structures without padding of the input. This allowed not only short-range dependencies, but also long-range dependencies to be identified. The DCNN was tested in several applied tasks that require thorough semantic understanding. It outperformed all comparison models in predicting sentiment of movie reviews in the Stanford Sentiment Treebank BIB14687186 and in identification of sentiment in tweets  ]. It was also one of the top performers in classifying types of questions using the TREC database BIB11039301 . Undoubtedly, the area of NLP space most dependent on good semantic understanding is that of machine translation. Between their requirement for such understanding and their ease of examination due to the typical encoder-decoder structure they use, neural machine translation (NMT) systems are splendid testbeds for researching internal semantic representations. One study that employed this, the results of which were published during the writing of this survey, was that conducted by BIB13888490 . Encoders were trained on four different language pairs: English and Arabic, English and Spanish, English and Chinese, and English and German. Building on a number of previous studies, the decoding classifiers were trained on four distinct datasets: Multi-NLI , which is an expanded version of SNLI , as well as three recast datasets from the JHU Decompositional Semantics Initiative [White et al. [n. d.] ] (FrameNet Plus or FN+ BIB602051 , Definite Pronoun Resolution or DPR BIB15274877 , and Semantic Proto-Roles or SPR BIB3011504 ). None of the results were particularly strong, although they were strongest in SPR. This led the researchers to the conclusion that NMT models do a poor job of capturing paraphrased information and fail to capture inferences that help in anaphora resolution (e.g. resolving gender, plurality, etc.). They did, however, find that the models may learn a reasonable amount about proto-roles (e.g. who or what is the recipient of an action). A concurrent work BIB21382535 ] analyzed the quality of many datasets used for natural language inference. BIB14215409 found that training semantic parsers on a single domain, as is often done, is less effective than training across many domains. This conclusion was drawn after constructing and testing three different LSTM-based models. The first model was a one-to-one model, in which a single encoder and single decoder were used, requiring the network itself to determine the domain of the input. In the second model, a many-to-many model, a decoder was used for each domain, as were two encoders: the domain specific encoder, and a multidomain encoder. The third model was a one-to-many model, using a single encoder, but separate decoders for each domain. Each model was trained on the "OVERNIGHT" dataset . Exceptional results were achieved for all models, with a state-of-the-art performance exhibited by the one-to-one model. Similar conclusions were drawn in a recently published study by BIB32106959 . This study also has some of the most significant implications for the entire field of natural language processing since Mikolov's arithmetic with word embeddings BIB16447573 . In this study, several LSTM-based encoder-decoder networks were created, and the embedding vectors produced were analyzed. A single encoder accepting English sentences as input was used, as were four different decoders. The first such decoder was a replicating decoder, which attempted to reproduce the original English input. The second and third decoders attempted to translate the text into German and French. Finally, the fourth decoder was a POS tagger. Different combinations of decoders were used; one model had only the replicating decoder while others had two, three, or, in one case, all four. Sentences of fourteen different structures from the EuroParl dataset  were used to train the networks. A set of test sentences were then fed to the encoders and their output analyzed. In all cases, fourteen clusters were formed, each corresponding to one of the sentence structures. Analyzing the spacing between the clusters and the number of misclassified results showed that adding more decoders led to more correct and more definitive clusters. In particular, using all four of the decoders led to a zero error rate. Furthermore, the researchers tested and confirmed a hypothesis regarding these sentence embeddings. They found that just as logical arithmetic can be performed on word embeddings, so can it be performed on sentence embeddings. For example, taking the vector embedding for, "This example works, " and subtracting the vector for, "This example fails, " produced a vector which when added to the embedding for, "Another attempt fails, " resulted in a vector nearly identical to the embedding of, "Another attempts work. " Note that while this sentence is incorrect, it is very close to the desired result. Furthermore, it differs from the desired sentence only in terms of anaphora, which was noted above to be the most difficult semantic construct to process. While this is acknowledged to be a well-controlled environment, it shows that NLP models are capable of capturing a great deal of meaning and paves the way for a new line of research, and potentially another revolution in the field.