Arguably, the most important task in current natural language processing is that of language modeling. Language modeling (LM) is an essential piece of almost any application of NLP, from speech recognition to machine translation. In essence, language modeling is the process of creating a model to predict words or simple linguistic components given previous words or components, usually with associated probabilities  . This is helpful in speech recognition as it can help resolve ambiguity between two similar sounding words or phrases. Likewise, it is useful for applications in which a user types input, particularly touch screen keyboards, to provide predictive ability for fast text entry. However, its power and versatility emanate from the fact that it can implicitly capture syntactic and semantic relationships among words or components in a linear neighborhood, making it useful for diverse tasks such as machine translation or text summarization, in which the program must validate input and/or produce output in the form of natural language. Using prediction, such programs are able to generate more clear and human-sounding sentences and validate the opposite. 3.1.1 Early Language Modeling. Historically, language modeling has been a statistical task    . For example, probabilities of word occurrences were calculated using data from large corpora. Initially, the bag-of-words approach was used, in which words were simply predicted by their frequencies of occurrence in the training corpus, possibly with smoothing of counts. A later development, that of the n-gram model, attempted to solve the problem by determining frequencies of words following each other. Inevitably, this significantly increased the size of the model and computation required to construct it, as instead of simply having vectors of size v, where v was the size of the vocabulary, the models consisted of matrices of size v × v. However, as many words rarely, if ever, follow each other in natural usage, the matrices were sparse. This observation allowed for significant reduction in the sizes of the models. The n-gram approach does not simply look at the probabilities of words following single other words, but instead at the probabilities of words following a set of n − 1 prior words. Hence, a bagof-words model would be considered a unigram or 1-gram model, a model using only one previous word a 2-gram or bigram model, and a model using the two previous words a trigram model. Due to the decreasing likelihood of a set of words having co-occurred in the training corpus as the size of n increases, a number of techniques were developed to allow for reasonably long n-grams to be used.  Typical models would use unigrams through 5-grams.