. BIB3000562 tested several different networks using several variations of attention mechanisms. The first network trained had a simple attention mechanism, which was not fully connected, having a window length of five. The second and third networks were more novel, particularly within the context of language modeling. The researchers hypothesized that using a single value to predict the next token, to encode information for the attentional unit, and to decode the information in the attentional unit hinders a network, as these are distinct tasks, and it is difficult to train a single parameter to perform all three tasks simultaneously. Therefore, in the second network, they designed each node to have two outputs: one used to encode and decode the information in the attentional unit, and another to predict the next tokens explicitly. In the third network, they further separated the outputs, using separate values to encode the information entering the attentional unit and decode the information being retrieved from it. These networks were respectively dubbed "Key-Value Attention" and "Key-Value-Predict Attention" networks. Tests on a self-made Wikipedia corpus showed that the attention mechanism improved perplexity compared to the baseline, and that successively adding the second and third parameters led to further increases. This showed that the use of attention mechanisms, particularly those with several distinct parameters, is useful in language modeling. It was also noted that only the previous five or so tokens carried much value (hence the selection of the window size of five). Therefore, it was decided to test a fourth network which simply used residual connections from each of the previous five units. It was found that this network also provided results comparable to many larger RNNs and LSTMs, suggesting that reasonable results can be achieved using simpler networks than have often been suggested. Another recent study was done on the usage of residual memory networks (RMNs) for language modeling  . While the authors made no mention as to whether or not they tested the use of multiple residual connections, they found that residual connections skipping two layers were most effective, followed closely by those skipping a single layer. Using these findings they designed recurrent networks with residual connections skipping two units at a time. Rather than having such a connection present at every layer, they had such repetitions reoccur in blocks. A residual connection was present between the first layer and the fourth, as was between the fifth layer and the eighth, and between the ninth and the twelfth. It was found that increasing network depth improved results, but that when using large batch sizes, memory constraints were encountered. Network width was not found to be of particular importance in terms of performance, however, wide networks were found to be harder to train. The networks were trained on the Penn Treebank and compared to the results of RNNs and LSTMs. It was found that RMNs are capable of outperforming LSTMs of similar size.