Event extraction is concerned with identifying words or phrases that refer to the occurrence of events, along with participants such as agents, objects, and recipients, as well as times when the events happen. Event extraction usually deals with four sub-tasks: identifying event mentions, or phrases that describe events; identifying event triggers, which are the main words-usually verbs or gerunds, sometimes infinitives-that specify the occurrence of the events; identifying arguments of the events; and identifying arguments' roles in the events. Almost all event extraction work uses supervised machine learning and depends on feature engineering, whereby clues obtained from lexical, syntactic, or knowledge-based analysis are used as features. These features are used with a classification algorithm to identify certain words as event triggers, identify the classes of events the triggers represent, et cetera. Early work by  used lexicon-, syntax-, and knowledge-based features along with a memory-based nearest neighbor classifier  ] and a maximum entropy classifier  . Details of many pre-ANN approaches to event extraction were discussed by Kalita [2016] . These approaches, some of which achieve high performance, are feature-driven, and as a result suffer from the drawbacks of requiring the generation of suitable feature sets and not being generalizable. In addition, because there are usually several stages, the errors tend to accumulate as they propagate from one to another. proposed an architecture that automatically extracted lexical-level and sentencelevel features without using complex NLP tools. They argued that CNNs that use max-pooling are likely to capture only the most important information in a sentence, and as a result, might miss valuable facts when considering sentences that refer to several events. To address this drawback, they divided the feature map into three parts, and instead of using one maximum value, kept the maximum value of each part. They called this a dynamic multi-pooling convolutional neural network (DMCNN). In the first stage, it classified each word in a sentence as either being a trigger word or non-trigger word. If triggers were found, the second stage aligned the roles of arguments. The experimental results showed that this approach significantly outperformed other state-of-the-art methods of the time. The following year, Nguyen et al. [2016] used an RNN-based encoder-decoder pair to identify event triggers and roles, exceeding the results of Chen et alii.