Similar to summarization and information extraction, question answering (QA) gathers specific points of data, phrases, or paragraphs. However, QA is different in that it returns this information in a coherent fashion in response to a request. This problem was historically broken into the following subtasks: question classification, passage retrieval, and answer extraction  . Question classification determines the type of information requested and the format of the response that should be returned. In passage retrieval, extractive summarization is often used to retrieve, simplify, and combine information in an intelligent order to create a response. Very early approaches to answer extraction used a variety of methods such as simple parse-match methods, which parse the given requests and match these same tokens to sentences or phrases in retrieved documents  ]. Other researchers used simple first-order logic languages combined with theorem proving models such as the one proposed by BIB6001997 . Current models and methods resemble those used in summarization.  used a gated attention-based recurrent network to match the question with an answer-containing passage. A self-matching attention mechanism was utilized to refine the machine representation by mapping the entire passage. Finally, pointer networks were used to predict the location and boundary of an answer. These networks used attention-pooling vector representations of passages, as well as the words being analyzed, to model the critical tokens or phrases necessary for the comprehension required. This mechanism helped shift the focus from significant words throughout passages to surrounding context windows. Multicolumn convolutional neural networks (MCCNNs) were used by BIB12926055 to automatically analyze questions from multiple viewpoints. Parallel networks were used to extract pertinent information from input questions. Separate networks were used to find context information and relationships and to determine which forms of answers should be returned. The output of these networks was then combined and used to rank possible answers. Training on question-answer pairs, the model, without extensive tuning, learned the logical forms automatically. A recent novel approach was the use of relational networks (RNs). First proposed by , RNs are built upon an MLP architecture, where the focus is on relational reasoning, i.e. defining relationships among entities in the data. These feed-forward networks implement a similar function among all pairs of objects in order to aggregate correlations among them. For input, the RNs took final LSTM representations of document sentences. These inputs were further paired with a representation of the information request given . The RN considered all permutations to determine if there were any relationships among the sentences in a given document, or between those sentences and the presented question.