Summarization is the task of finding elements or characteristics of interest from documents in order to produce an encapsulation of the most important information. There are two primary types of summarization techniques: extractive and abstractive. The first focuses on sentence extraction, simplification, reordering, and concatenation to relay the important information contained in documents using text taken directly from the documents. A large number of extractive summarization algorithms have been proposed over the years. These include frequency-based approaches  BIB15475171 ; machine-learning (naive Bayes) -based algorithms BIB5775833 ; and graph-based algorithms, computing centrality measure and relative importance of sentences BIB506350 using the PageRank algorithm BIB1508503 . Abstractive summaries rely on expressing documents' contents through generation-style abstraction, possibly using words never seen in the documents  . Historically, abstractive summarization algorithms have included graph-based algorithms BIB988010 as well as parse tree and graph-to-graph transformations . More recently-and with increasing success-deep learning methods have been used for abstractive summarization. Deep learning approaches generally use recurrent encoder-decoder architectures. Breaking rank was the application to summarization of the feedforward neural language model by BIB1918428 . The language model used an attention-based encoder and a generative beam search decoder. The initial input was given directly to both the language model and the convolutional attention-based encoder, which determined contextual importance surrounding the summary sentences and phrases. The performance of the model was comparable to other state-of-the-art models of the time. As in other areas, attention mechanisms have improved performance of encoder-decoder models. A state-of-the-art approach developed by Paulus et al. [2017] used a multiple intra-temporal attention encoder mechanism that considered not only the input text tokens, but also the output tokens used by the decoder for previously generated words. They also used similar hybrid crossentropy loss functions to those proposed by BIB7147309 , which led to decreases in training and execution by orders of magnitude. Finally, they recommended using strategies seen in reinforcement learning to modify gradients and reduce exposure bias, which has been noted in models trained exclusively via supervised learning. The use of attention also boosted accuracy in the fully convolutional model proposed by BIB3648736 , who implemented an attention mechanism for each layer.