Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 1 of 57

1 Timothy J. Eckstein, 018321 Joshua D. Bendor, 031908
2 OSBORN MALEDON, P.A. 2929 N. Central Ave., Suite 2100
3 Phoenix, Arizona 85012-2793 (602) 640-9000
4 teckstein@omlaw.com jbendor@omlaw.com
5
A. Dami Animashaun 6 Katherine Chamblee-Ryan
Olevia Boykin 7 CIVIL RIGHTS CORPS
910 17th Street NW, Second Floor 8 Washington, D.C. 20006
(202) 656-5189 9 dami@civilrightscorps.org
katie@civilrightscorps.org 10 olevia@civilrightscorps.org

11 Attorneys for Plaintiffs

12

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

13

FOR THE DISTRICT OF ARIZONA

14 DeShawn Briggs, Mark Pascale,

15

McKenna Stephens, and Lucia Soria, on behalf of themselves and all others

No. CV-18-2684-PHX-EJM _______________

16 similarly situated; Taja Collier,

SECOND AMENDED CLASS

17 v.

Plaintiffs,

ACTION COMPLAINT AND JURY TRIAL DEMAND

18 William Montgomery, in his official

19

capacity as County Attorney of Maricopa County; Maricopa County;

20

Treatment Assessment Screening Center, Inc.,

21

Defendants.

22

OVERVIEW

23

1. The Maricopa County Attorney’s Office (MCAO) and the Treatment

24 Assessment Screening Center (TASC) jointly operate a possession of marijuana

25 diversion program1 that penalizes the poor because of their poverty.

26

27 1 This diversion program is referred to in the Complaint as “the possession of

28

marijuana diversion program,” “the marijuana diversion program,” and “the program.”

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 2 of 57

1

2. In a “diversion” program, participants undergo a period of supervision

2 and must meet certain requirements to avoid criminal prosecution and conviction.

3

3. The programs are generally “a functional equivalent of a sentence to

4 pretrial probation . . . and [are] staffed with paraprofessionals overseeing individuals in

5 what [is] in effect a probationary-type of supervision and control.”2

6

4. In principle, the programs are “intended to relieve overburdened courts

7 and crowded jails, and to spare low-risk offenders from the devastating consequences

8 of a criminal record.”3

9

5. But in Maricopa County, they serve another purpose: to make money for

10 those who operate the program, including the MCAO.4

11

6. Between 2006 and 2016, MCAO collected nearly $15 million in revenue

12 by diverting threatened prosecutions to TASC.5

13

7. The length of time a person spends in the diversion program and whether

14 the person ultimately completes the program and avoids felony criminal prosecution

15 depends on whether she can pay the program’s required fees.

16

17 2 S. Rep. No. 93–1021, at 36–37 (1974) (describing the operation of two pretrial diversion programs).
18 3 Shaila Dewan & Andrew W. Lehren, No Money, No Mercy: After a Crime, the

Price of a Second Chance, N.Y. Times (Dec. 12, 2016), 19 https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/12/us/crime-criminal-justice-reform-

20 diversion.html. 4 See Megan Cassidy, If Prop. 205 Passes, Maricopa County Attorney’s Office
21 Funds From Marijuana Diversion Program Would Dry Up, Ariz. Republic (Oct. 26,

22 2016), https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/phoenix/2016/10/26/prop-205marijuana-diversion-tasc-dry-up-county-attorney-bill-montgomery-

23 millions/92795924; Ray Stern, If Prop 205 Passes, the Maricopa County Attorney’s

Budget is Likely to Take a Hit, Phoenix New Times (Oct. 31, 2016), 24 https://www.phoenixnewtimes.com/news/if-prop-205-passes-the-maricopa-county-

25 attorneys-budget-is-likely-to-take-a-hit-8782184; Ray Stern, Potential Marijuana Legalization in Arizona Threatens TASC Drug Treatment Firm’s Funding, Phoenix
26 New Times (Jan. 26, 2016), https://www.phoenixnewtimes.com/news/potential-

27

marijuana-legalization-in-arizona-threatens-tasc-drug-treatment-firms-funding7999610.

28 5 See Cassidy, supra note 4.

2

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 3 of 57

1

8. In order to complete the program and avoid felony criminal prosecution,

2 participants in the marijuana diversion program must pay a fee of $950 or $1000.

3

9. Participants must also pay $15 or $17 for each drug and alcohol test; they

4 may be required to take as many as three or four tests each week.

5

10. The program is two-tiered: people who meet program requirements—

6 completing a three-hour drug education seminar and routine drug and alcohol testing—

7 and are wealthy enough to pay the $950 or $1000 program fee complete the program in

8 90 days and are no longer subject to felony criminal prosecution.

9

11. But participants who cannot pay the program fees are forced to stay in the

10 program for at least six months and until they can pay off the money owed to MCAO

11 and TASC, even if they have satisfied every program requirement other than payment.

12

12. During the “pay-only”6 period, participants remain subject to felony

13 criminal prosecution during the additional time they are forced to remain in the

14 diversion program.

15

13. These participants also remain subject to all of the diversion program’s

16 requirements.

17

14. These requirements include reporting to a TASC location, as often as four

18 times per week, so that the participant’s urine can be collected and tested.

19

15. Participants who remain on diversion solely because of their inability to

20 pay program fees must also continue to pay $15 or $17 each time they are required to

21 submit to a drug and alcohol test.

22

23

24 6 “Pay-only” refers to a period of criminal supervision during which the person is

25 supervised only because she has not paid all of her debt. This “extremely muscular form of debt collection,” which “masquerades as supervision,” is becoming

26 increasingly common. Human Rights Watch, Profiting from Probation: America’s

27

‘Offender Funded’ Probation Industry (Feb. 5, 2014), https://www.hrw.org/report/2014/02/05/profiting-probation/americas-offender-

28 funded-probation-industry.

3

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 4 of 57

1

16. The perverse result is that poor people are ultimately charged more

2 money—potentially hundreds of dollars more—than similarly situated participants who

3 can afford to pay to finish the program in 90 days.

4

17. Participants who cannot afford to pay for diversion may also be

5 terminated from the program altogether and referred for felony prosecution.

6

18. This can happen in at least two ways.

7

19. First, Defendants require diversion participants to make a minimum

8 monthly payment towards the $950 or $1000 program fees at a rate set by Defendant

9 TASC.

10

20. A participant who fails to pay the minimum monthly payment set by

11 Defendant TASC can be terminated from the program and prosecuted.

12

21. Defendants do not inquire into a participant’s ability to pay before setting

13 the minimum monthly fee.

14

22. Defendants’ policy does not include any exception for participants who

15 do not pay the minimum monthly amount solely because they cannot afford it.

16

23. Second, participants are not allowed to take the drug and alcohol tests the

17 program requires if they cannot afford to pay for them.

18

24. For example, if a participant cannot pay the $15 or $17 fee for a drug and

19 alcohol test, she is not allowed to take the test at all.

20

25. Therefore, if a participant reports for a drug and alcohol test without the

21 required fee, she will be turned away, and she will receive a violation for missing the

22 test.

23

26. In other words, an unpaid drug and alcohol test is a failed test.

24

27. If a participant misses too many drug and alcohol tests—even if she

25 missed them solely because she could not afford to pay for them—she will be failed out

26 of the diversion program and prosecuted for felony possession of marijuana.

27

28 4

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 5 of 57

1

28. Defendants enforce these policies even when they know that diversion

2 participants are poor or even homeless, and even when they know that participants are

3 sacrificing basic necessities to pay fees.

4

29. And indeed, Defendants have a financial incentive to enforce the policies

5 this way—and to use the specter of termination and felony prosecution to coerce as

6 much money from participants as they can.

7

30. Diversion participants who alert TASC employees that they cannot afford

8 the required fees are told that they will be failed from the program if they do not pay

9 and to do whatever it takes to get the money.

10

31. For example, Plaintiff Marc Pascale is a 60-year-old man with

11 degenerative disc disease, which has left him physically unable to work.

12

32. TASC refused to waive his program and drug and alcohol testing fees

13 even after he repeatedly told them that he could not afford to pay the fees.

14

33. Mr. Pascale’s case manager repeatedly told him to borrow money to pay

15 the fees or else he would fail the program, lose the money he had already paid in

16 program and drug and alcohol testing fees, and be prosecuted for felony criminal

17 possession of marijuana.

18

34. Plaintiff Taja Collier emailed her case manager at TASC to tell her that

19 she was homeless and could not afford to pay for drug and alcohol testing.

20

35. Ms. Collier’s case manager responded that if she did not test, she would

21 be issued a notice of violation and her case would be sent back to court, where she

22 would be prosecuted for felony criminal possession of marijuana.

23

36. As a result, Ms. Collier sold her blood plasma to pay for drug and alcohol

24 tests.

25

37. Plaintiffs bring this civil rights action pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 to

26 redress violations of Named Plaintiffs’, class members’, and Plaintiff Collier’s rights

27 under the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution.

28 5

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 6 of 57

1

38. Named Plaintiffs DeShawn Briggs, Mark Pascale, and Lucia Soria, as

2 well as the class members whose interests they represent, seek monetary damages

3 against Defendants for violation of these rights.

4

39. Named Plaintiffs McKenna Stephens and Lucia Soria, as well as the class

5 members whose interests they represent, seek injunctive relief against the Defendants

6 to enjoin Defendants from continuing their unlawful and unconstitutional policies,

7 practices, and customs.

8

40. Plaintiff Taja Collier seeks monetary damages and injunctive relief on her

9 own behalf.

10

PARTIES

11

Plaintiffs

12

41. Plaintiff DeShawn Briggs is a 28-year-old African American man. He is

13 a resident of Maricopa County, Arizona. Mr. Briggs spent six months in Defendants’

14 marijuana diversion program solely because he was unable to pay the program fees

15 within 90 days. He represents himself and a class of similarly situated people subject to

16 Defendants’ unlawful policies, practices, and customs.

17

42. Plaintiff Marc Pascale is a 60-year-old white man. He is a resident of

18 Maricopa County, Arizona. Mr. Pascale spent more than seven months in Defendants’

19 marijuana diversion program solely because he was unable to pay the program fees in

20 90 days. He represents himself and a class of similarly situated people subject to

21 Defendants’ unlawful policies, practices, and customs.

22

43. Plaintiff McKenna Stephens is a 24-year-old white woman. She is a

23 resident of Maricopa County, Arizona. Ms. Stephens is currently a participant in

24 Defendants’ marijuana diversion program. Ms. Stephens has complied with all of the

25 program requirements to date and will complete all non-monetary program

26 requirements during the first 90 days of the program. However, she is unable to pay the

27 program fees in full during the first 90 days of the program. Therefore, as a result of

28 6

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 7 of 57

1 Defendants’ policies and practices, Ms. Stephens will be forced to stay in the program

2 for at least six months and until she can pay all of the required fees. As long as Ms.

3 Stephens is required to remain in the program, she will remain subject to felony criminal

4 prosecution and be forced to submit to routine, suspicionless drug and alcohol tests.

5 Ms. Stephens also cannot afford the minimum monthly payments Defendants require,

6 and Defendants may terminate her from the program as a result. She represents herself

7 and a class of similarly situated people subject to Defendants’ unlawful policies,

8 practices, and customs.

9

44. Plaintiff Lucia Soria is a 38-year-old Latina woman. She is a resident of

10 Maricopa County, Arizona. Ms. Soria is currently being supervised on Defendants’

11 marijuana diversion program solely because she is unable to pay program fees. Ms.

12 Soria represents herself and a class of similarly-situated people subject to Defendants’

13 unlawful policies, practices, and customs.

14

45. Plaintiff Taja Collier is a 21-year-old African American woman. She is

15 a resident of Maricopa County, Arizona. Ms. Collier first enrolled in Defendants’

16 marijuana diversion program in July 2017. Ms. Collier was willing to meet all diversion

17 requirements, but she could not afford to pay for drug and alcohol testing, particularly

18 during a month when she was homeless and sleeping in parks. After Ms. Collier could

19 not afford to pay for several drug and alcohol tests, she was terminated from the

20 diversion program and prosecuted for felony possession of marijuana. After prosecution

21 was initiated, Ms. Collier was again diverted into Defendants’ diversion program. Ms.

22 Collier cannot afford the minimum monthly payments Defendants require, and

23 Defendants may terminate her from the program as a result. Ms. Collier also cannot

24 afford to pay for the required drug and alcohol tests, and she may be terminated for that

25 reason as well. Ms. Collier brings this suit on her own behalf.

26

27

28 7

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 8 of 57

1

Defendants

2

46. Defendant Bill Montgomery is the elected County Attorney for

3 Maricopa County, Arizona. Defendant Montgomery is the chief official responsible for

4 the enforcement and prosecution of felonies within Maricopa County. Defendant

5 Montgomery is also responsible for operating and administering the deferred

6 prosecution programs in Maricopa County. Defendant Montgomery is the final

7 policymaker for Maricopa County on matters relating to diversion programs, including

8 the marijuana diversion program at issue in this lawsuit. He is sued in his official

9 capacity.

10

47. Defendant Maricopa County, Arizona7 is a political subdivision formed

11 and designated as such pursuant to Title 11 of the Arizona Revised Statutes. Defendant

12 Maricopa County can sue and be sued in its own name. Maricopa County is liable for

13 the practices and policies of Defendants Montgomery and TASC. The County has and

14 continues to acquiesce in the administration of the TASC drug diversion program,

15 including the marijuana diversion program at issue in this lawsuit.

16

48. Defendant Treatment Assessment Screening Center is a private, non-

17 profit, 501(c)(3) corporation headquartered in Phoenix, Arizona. Defendant TASC has

18 contracted and continues to contract with MCAO to operate, administer, and supervise

19 the marijuana diversion program at issue in this lawsuit. Defendant TASC supervises

20 all people whose prosecutions for simple possession of marijuana have been diverted.

21 Defendant TASC acts under the color of law in its administration and supervision of

22 the County’s marijuana diversion program.

23

24

25

26
27 7 Defendant Montgomery, in his official capacity, acts on behalf of and is the final policymaker for Maricopa County with respect to the conduct described in this
28 lawsuit. If this is correct, naming Maricopa County as a defendant is redundant. 8

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 9 of 57

1

JURISDICTION

2

49. This action arises under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and the Constitution of the

3 United States. This Court has subject matter jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331 and

4 1343.

5

50. Venue is proper under 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b). All Defendants’ official

6 places of business are located within this District. The events giving rise to the claims

7 occurred in this District.

8

STATEMENT OF FACTS

9 I. Defendants’ Unlawful Policies

10

Marijuana Possession Prosecutions in Maricopa County

11

51. In Arizona, possession of any amount of marijuana—even trace

12 amounts—can be prosecuted as a felony.8

13

52. Felony prosecution has severe consequences.

14

53. According to the National Inventory of the Collateral Consequences of

15 Conviction—an American Bar Association database—people convicted of felony

16 offenses in Arizona are subject to over 350 “collateral consequences” as a direct result

17 of a felony criminal conviction.9

18

19

20

21

22 8 See Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 13-3405(B)(1) (providing that possession of “an

23 amount of marijuana not possessed for sale having a weight of less than two pounds is

guilty of a class 6 felony”). Arizona is the only state in the nation where any amount 24 of marijuana, no matter how small, can draw a felony charge. See Jacob Sullum,

25 Explaining His Cannabis Conversion, John Boehner Cites a Marijuana Myth, Reason (Apr. 12, 2018), http://reason.com/blog/2018/04/12/explaining-his-cannabis-

26 conversion-john/print. Possession of marijuana paraphernalia is also a class 6 felony

27

under Arizona law. See Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 13-3415(A). 9 See National Inventory of the Collateral Consequences of Conviction,

28 https://niccc.csgjusticecenter.org/search/?jurisdiction=8 (last visited Oct. 12, 2018).

9

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 10 of 57

1

54. For example, a person convicted of a felony in Arizona cannot vote, serve

2 on a jury, obtain a commercial driver’s license, possess a gun, or join the U.S. armed

3 forces.10

4

55. A felony conviction may also bar a person from receiving professional

5 licenses and affect a person’s child custody rights, parental status, and housing.11

6

56. A person with a felony drug conviction in Arizona may lose public

7 benefits, such as food stamps and social security benefits.12

8

57. Defendant County Attorney Bill Montgomery has aggressively opposed

9 legalization measures as well as efforts to reduce simple possession of marijuana to a

10 misdemeanor.

11

58. In 2016, Defendant Montgomery successfully advocated against the

12 passage of Proposition 205, a ballot initiative that would have made recreational

13 marijuana use legal in Arizona.

14

59. Defendant Montgomery made numerous public statements and

15 participated in public debates attacking the initiative and advocating for its failure.

16

60. During a public debate on marijuana legalization, Defendant

17 Montgomery told a Vietnam veteran, who admitted to using medical marijuana for back

18 pain and occasional recreation use, “I have no respect for you. … [Y]ou’re an enemy.”

19

61. Defendant Montgomery has also worked to narrow Arizona’s medical

20 marijuana laws.

21

62. For example, when Defendant Montgomery learned that doctors were

22 able to stop a five-year-old’s seizures by using a marijuana extract, he threatened the

23

24

25 10 See Consequences of a Felony, Maricopa County, AZ,
26 https://www.maricopa.gov/930/Consequences-for-a-Felony (last visited Oct. 11,

27

2018). 11 Id.

28 12 Id.

10

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 11 of 57

1 child’s parents with felony prosecution, arguing that extracts were not covered by the

2 state’s medical marijuana allowance.13

3

63. Drug possession charges represent an overwhelming proportion of the

4 charges filed by MCAO.

5

64. Possession of marijuana is the MCAO’s most commonly prosecuted

6 offense; it amounts to approximately 15 percent of total prosecutions.14

7

65. And more broadly, more than 45 percent of MCAO’s prosecutions are for

8 drug possession.15

9

66. Between 2006 and 2016, MCAO made nearly $15 million from diverting

10 threatened prosecutions to TASC.16

11

The Possession of Marijuana Diversion Program

12

67. For most people who are arrested in Maricopa County for simple

13 possession of marijuana or marijuana paraphernalia, the only way to avoid a felony

14 criminal prosecution is to complete the diversion program offered by MCAO.

15

68. To operate, administer, and supervise participants in the program, MCAO

16 has contracted with TASC, a private, non-profit company.

17

69. TASC also partners with MCAO to administer a diversion program for

18 possession of narcotics.

19

20

21

22 13 Evan Wyloge, Court Rules Medical Marijuana Patients Can Use Extracts, Ariz.
23 Capitol Times (Mar. 22, 2014), https://azcapitoltimes.com/news/2014/03/22/azmedical-marijuana-patients-can-use-cannabis-extract-court-rules-bill-montgomery.
24 14 See Maricopa County Attorney’s Office, 2016 Annual Report, at 43,
25 available at https://www.maricopacountyattorney.org/ArchiveCenter/ViewFile/Item/88. The year 2016 is the most recent for which MCAO has published
26 this charging data. 27 15 Id. (calculated by adding the percentage of the total offenses charged represented
by each type of drug charge listed). 28 16 Cassidy, supra note 4.
11

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 12 of 57

1

70. More than 15,000 people participated in MCAO and TASC’s marijuana

2 diversion program between 2011 and 2017.17

3

71. Over that same time period, the marijuana diversion program accounted

4 for approximately three quarters of TASC’s total intakes for drug diversion.18

5

72. People arrested for simple possession of marijuana or marijuana

6 paraphernalia can enter the diversion program either before or after criminal charges

7 are filed.

8

73. People who enter into the marijuana diversion program post-filing have

9 charges filed against them prior to enrolling in the program.

10

74. The charges are suspended while the person completes the program.

11

75. If the person successfully completes the program, MCAO dismisses the

12 case.

13

76. If the person fails to complete the program, MCAO reinstates

14 prosecution.

15

77. People can also enter the program before any criminal charges are filed

16 in court.

17

78. People who enter the marijuana diversion program pre-filing are sent a

18 letter from MCAO.

19

79. The letter informs the person that she is facing class 6 felony charges and

20 offers two options: criminal prosecution or the TASC marijuana diversion program.

21

22

23 17 See id. (providing the number of participants who enrolled in the program
24 between 2011 and 2015); Letter from Bill Montgomery, County Attorney, Maricopa
25 County, to Elizabeth Ortiz, Executive Director, Arizona Prosecuting Attorneys’ Advisory Council (Aug. 8, 2017) (providing the number of participants who enrolled
26 in the program from July 1, 2016 through June 30, 2017). 27 18 See Cassidy, supra note 4; Letter from Bill Montgomery, County Attorney,
Maricopa County, to Elizabeth Ortiz, Executive Director, Arizona Prosecuting
28 Attorneys’ Advisory Council (Aug. 8, 2017). 12

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 13 of 57

1

80. The letter warns, “If convicted of a class 6 felony, you could receive a

2 maximum sentence of 2 years in prison and a maximum fine of $150,000 plus 80%

3 surcharge.”

4

81. The letter also warns that a class 1 misdemeanor conviction could result

5 in “a maximum sentence of six months in jail and a maximum fine of $2,500.00 plus

6 80% surcharge.”

7

82. The threats in this letter are false.

8

83. The pre-filing diversion program generally only includes people with no

9 prior convictions.

10

84. Under Arizona law, jail or prison time is prohibited for a first or second

11 offense of simple possession of marijuana.

12

85. Instead, for people in this category, the law requires drug treatment and a

13 maximum penalty of probation. See Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 13-901.01(A), (D), (H)(1).

14

86. Accordingly, the people who receive the pre-filing letter threatening jail

15 time are ineligible to be jailed as a matter of state law.

16

87. The letter’s representation that its recipients could be fined $150,000 plus

17 an 80% surcharge are false as well.19

18

88. After delivering these false threats, the letter explains the basic

19 requirements of the marijuana diversion program and provides a deadline and contact

20 information to sign up for the program.

21

89. If a person in the pre-filing category completes the diversion program,

22 MCAO will not file charges against her.

23

24

25 19 A person convicted of possession of marijuana can be fined $750 or three times

26 the value of the marijuana involved. See Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 13-3405(D). $150,000 is

27

the maximum fine allowable for any felony. See Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 13-801(a). No person accused of a crime involving $50,000 worth of marijuana would be eligible for

28 TASC.

13

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 14 of 57

1

90. Failing the program results in criminal prosecution.20

2

91. Participants who do not complete the diversion program and whose cases

3 are prosecuted have little hope of avoiding felony criminal prosecution and conviction

4 because people who enroll in the marijuana diversion program—whether pre- or post-

5 filing—are first required to sign a statement of facts admitting their guilt.

6

92. A TASC employee tells participants exactly what to write in the statement

7 of facts.

8

93. The following information must be written into the statement:

9

a. Date and location of the offense;

10

b. The full name of the substance possessed;

11

c. That the participant possessed a usable amount of the substance; and

12

d. The facts of the offense, which must read, “the [name of the drug] was

13

found in [where the drug was found] in my possession.”

14

94. This signed statement of facts can be used against a person if she fails to

15 complete the marijuana diversion program and is criminally prosecuted. See State v.

16 Gill, 391 P.3d 1193, 1197 (Ariz. 2017) (holding that a written admission contained in

17 a statement of facts obtained by a TASC representative was admissible at trial).

18

The Cost of Avoiding Prosecution

19

95. Once enrolled in the marijuana diversion program, the requirements for

20 the pre- and post-filing participants are the same.

21

96. For both groups of participants, avoiding prosecution costs money.

22

97. To complete the program, all participants must:

23

a. Pay program fees—$950 or $1000—in full;

24

b. Pay for and pass routine drug and alcohol tests for 90 days; and

25 20 When a person in the pre-filing group fails diversion, the prosecutor will file

26 charges in the case. When a person in the post-filing group fails diversion, the

27

prosecutor will move to reinstate the prosecution. As a matter of policy, practice, and custom, for both pre- and post-filing participants, TASC sends the participant a final

28 warning letter before the participant is failed from the program.

14

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 15 of 57

1

c. Complete a three-hour drug education seminar.

2

98. The mandatory $950 or $1000 program fee includes the following:

3

a. $150 admission fee;

4

b. $650 “drug fund” fee;

5

c. $150 TASC fee; and

6

d. $50 booking fee, which applies only to participants who were arrested

7

and booked.

8

99. All of these fees must be paid in person by debit card or with a money

9 order.

10

100. Participants are not allowed to pay by any other means, including with

11 credit or cash.

12

101. Defendants require that participants pay the $150 admission fee at the

13 program orientation.

14

102. If a participant is unable to pay the $150 admission fee at orientation

15 because she cannot afford it, Defendants allow her to pay $75 at orientation and the

16 other $75 during the program.

17

103. If a participant cannot afford to pay $75 at orientation, she may be told to

18 return with the money the same day or be failed from the program and face felony

19 prosecution.

20

104. In addition to the $950 or $1000 in fees, participants must pay to take

21 drug and alcohol tests at TASC.

22

105. Each drug and alcohol test costs $15 or $17, depending on the method of

23 payment.

24

106. Participants must call TASC or consult a phone application every day,

25 seven days a week to determine whether they are required to report to a TASC location

26 that day so that TASC can collect and test their urine.

27

28 15

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 16 of 57

1

107. If a participant does not call daily, she may miss a scheduled test and be

2 sanctioned, which could ultimately result in termination from the diversion program,

3 followed by felony prosecution.

4

108. Participants are required to drug test at least once—and often multiple

5 times—each week.

6

109. At the TASC location, TASC employees watch participants through glass

7 panels while they submit urine for drug and alcohol testing.

8

110. In at least one TASC location, the bathroom where participants submit

9 urine for testing includes multiple mirrors so that a TASC employee can watch the

10 participant urinate from multiple angles.

11

111. Records obtained as part of the preliminary investigation for this lawsuit

12 revealed that participants may be required to test as many as nine times per month.

13

112. Thus, on top of the $1000 in program fees, diversion participants pay at

14 least $60—but up to $153—each month for drug and alcohol tests.

15

113. In addition to the three program requirements, Defendants impose a

16 number of additional terms on participants.

17

114. These terms are set forth in a document called the “Client Contract.” 21

18

115. The Client Contract states that diversion participants must make

19 minimum monthly payments towards those fees at a rate set by Defendant TASC.

20

116. The rate set forth in the Client Contract is $160 or $170 per month.

21

117. Defendant TASC does not inquire into a participant’s ability to pay before

22 setting the minimum monthly fee.

23

118. If a participant does not make the minimum monthly payment set by

24 Defendant TASC, she can be terminated from the program and then prosecuted.

25

26 21 See MCAO/TASC Adult Deferred Prosecution Program Possession of

27

Marijuana, Client Contract (hereinafter “Client Contract”). In this Complaint, Plaintiffs cite the version of the Client Contract distributed to participants on Tuesday,

28 October 9, 2018.

16

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 17 of 57

1

119. The Client Contract also prohibits, among other things:

2

a. Alcohol use, including over-the-counter medications that include

3

alcohol, like NyQuil;22

4

b. Leaving the state for any amount of time without “special permission

5

from TASC”;23

6

c. Leaving Maricopa County for more than one day without informing a

7

TASC case manager;24

8

d. Taking any prescription medication without reporting it to a TASC

9

case manager and bringing the prescription to TASC for

10

verification.25

11

120. The Client Contract also states that “[u]nless disability status applies,

12 [participants] must be employed while participating in the program.”26

13

121. “[V]iolation of any” of these provisions “can result in program

14 termination.”27

15

Defendants Require Participants to Remain on Diversion

Until All Fees Are Paid

16

122. Participants who complete the three program requirements—including

17 full payment of fees—within 90 days complete the diversion program at that point, and

18 they are not subject to felony criminal prosecution thereafter.

19

123. However, as a matter of policy, practice, and custom, people who cannot

20 afford to pay the program fees in full within 90 days are not released from the

21 program—even if they have completed the other program requirements, including

22 passing all drug and alcohol tests.

23

24

25 22 Id. ¶ 5. 23 Id. ¶ 10.

26 24 Id.

27

25 26

Id. ¶ 3. Id. ¶ 17.

28 27 Id. (unnumbered paragraph).

17

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 18 of 57

1

124. Instead, participants who cannot afford to pay these fees must remain

2 subject to the requirements of the diversion program for a minimum of six months.

3

125. If these participants are not able to pay the program fees by the end of six

4 months, they must remain in the program until they do.

5

126. Defendants do not assess a person’s ability to pay before refusing to

6 consider her for program completion after 90 days, even when the participant has

7 completed every program requirement other than payment.

8

127. Nor do Defendants assess a person’s ability to pay before they require her

9 to remain on diversion beyond six months and until all fees are paid.

10

128. People who are forced to stay on diversion solely because they cannot

11 afford to pay program fees remain subject felony prosecution until they complete the

12 program.

13

129. In addition, these “pay only”28 participants are subject to same

14 requirements as they were during the first 90 days on diversion.

15

130. Thus, “pay only” participants are barred from drinking alcohol, taking

16 certain medications (like NyQuil), and leaving the State without Defendant TASC’s

17 approval.29

18

131. “Pay only” participants must continue to submit to one or more drug and

19 alcohol tests weekly—under the threat of felony criminal prosecution.

20

132. These participants must also complete all of the requirements attendant

21 to the drug and alcohol tests.

22

133. For example, participants must continue to call TASC every day, seven

23 days a week, to determine whether they are required to report to a TASC location during

24 a certain time period that day so that TASC can collect and test their urine.

25

26

27 28 See supra note 6 (explaining the term “pay-only”). 28 29 See Client Contract ¶¶ 3, 5, 10.
18

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 19 of 57

1

134. People who remain on diversion because they cannot afford to pay

2 program fees are also still forced to pay $15 or $17 for each drug and alcohol test.

3

135. As a result, these participants may ultimately have to pay hundreds of

4 dollars more than people wealthy enough to pay the $950 or $1000 program fee within

5 90 days—in addition to remaining subject to felony criminal prosecution for months

6 longer.

7

Defendants Terminate Participants from the Diversion Program

for Failure to Pay Minimum Monthly Program Fees

8

136. Pursuant to Defendants’ written policy, failure to pay program fees at the

9 monthly rate set by Defendant TASC will result in termination from the program and

10 prosecution for felony possession of marijuana.

11

137. The Client Contract, to which all participants are subject, states that the

12 minimum monthly rate is $160 or $170.

13

138. Defendants’ policy does not include any exception for participants who

14 did not make their monthly payment solely because they could not afford it.

15

139. Defendants do not inquire into a participant’s ability to pay before setting

16 the minimum monthly fee.

17

140. The Client Contract states: “Failure to make payments [toward the

18 program fees] each month as agreed will result in [the] case being returned for

19 prosecution.”30

20

141. Another paragraph of the Client Contract states that “failure to test as

21 scheduled, continued positive/diluted/altered tests, missed seminar/counseling, and/or

22 failure to make payments as agreed may result in unsuccessful termination from the

23 program.”31

24

142. Defendants have discretion as to when to enforce this policy; they may

25 terminate a participant on the first missed payment or the tenth.

26

27 30 Id. ¶ 12. 28 31 Id. ¶ 17 (emphasis added).
19

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 20 of 57

1

143. But in every case, Defendants have a financial incentive to use the threat

2 of termination to coerce as much money from participants as they can.

3

144. Thus, a diversion participant who at any point is unable to make the

4 monthly payment set by Defendant TASC can be terminated from the program and

5 prosecuted for felony possession of marijuana.

6

Defendants Do Not Allow Participants to Take Drug and Alcohol Tests

7

Unless They Pay for Them

8

145. As a matter of policy, practice, and custom, Defendants do not allow

9 diversion participants to take the program’s mandatory drug and alcohol tests unless

10 they can pay for them at the time of the test.

11

146. As a result, poor people are forced to extend their time on the program

12 for failing to take mandatory drug and alcohol tests—solely because they could not

13 afford to pay for them.

14

147. People who cannot afford to take drug and alcohol tests may also fail the

15 program altogether.

16

148. Missed drug and alcohol tests are counted as “violations”—even when a

17 person only missed the test because she could not afford to pay for it.

18

149. The Client Contract states that “failure to test as scheduled . . . may result

19 in unsuccessful termination from the program.”32

20

150. A person who accrues too many of these violations will be failed by

21 TASC and referred to the MCAO for prosecution.

22

151. When this happens, a person faces felony prosecution solely because of

23 her inability to pay.

24

152. No one at TASC assesses a person’s ability to pay before referring her for

25 prosecution because she did not pay for drug and alcohol tests.

26

27 32 Client Contract ¶ 16. 28
20

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 21 of 57

1

153. Nor does anyone at MCAO assess ability to pay before prosecuting

2 people who have failed diversion solely because of their inability to pay for drug and

3 alcohol tests.

4

Defendants’ Refusal to Waive Fees for the Poor

5

154. As a matter of policy, practice, and custom, Defendants do not reduce or

6 waive the $950 or $1000 program fee for any person, regardless of financial

7 circumstances.

8

155. Defendants contend that they allow for reductions of drug and alcohol

9 testing fees to $7 instead of $15 per test for participants who cannot afford them—but

10 these reductions are almost never granted in practice.

11

156. At the outset, Defendants do not assess participants’ ability to pay before

12 charging them in full for tests.

13

157. But even when Defendants are aware that a participant is indigent and

14 unable to pay without sacrificing basic necessities, Defendants require the participant

15 to pay the full $15 or $17 to test.

16

158. One TASC employee interviewed by investigators for undersigned

17 counsel stated that reduced drug and alcohol testing fees are reserved for people who

18 can demonstrate that they have basically zero income.

19

159. Another TASC employee explained that fee reductions are “very

20 difficult” to get and that “it rarely happens.”

21

160. As one TASC employee explained, drug and alcohol testing is “strictly

22 fee for service.”

23

161. When participants tell TASC case managers that they are struggling to

24 pay, the case managers recommend they borrow money from friends or family because

25 they will be failed from the program and prosecuted if they do not pay.

26

27

28 21

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 22 of 57

1

162. According to Defendants’ written policy, even in the rare cases that fee

2 reductions are granted, full fees can be reinstated as a punishment for a dirty or diluted

3 urine test.

4

163. Defendants’ Client Contract warns, “If [a participant’s] fees are reduced

5 and [the participant] submit[s] a positive/diluted/altered urine test, full fees may be

6 reinstated … from that point forward until completion of the program.”33

7

The “User-Funded” Model

8

164. Defendants MCAO and TASC advertise the diversion program as “user-

9 funded.”

10

165. According to MCAO, “user-funded” means that “the [person entering the

11 program] typically bears the costs of the initial assessment and the assigned treatment.”

12

166. A brochure published by MCAO describing its felony pretrial diversion

13 programs notes that “defendants … bear the costs of the program.”34

14

167. Defendant TASC’s website explains that the diversion program “is fully

15 funded by the clients we serve.”35

16

168. Defendant TASC is responsible for collecting fees from the people

17 enrolled in the diversion program.

18

169. Defendant TASC keeps a portion of the money it collects.

19

170. The $650 “drug fund fee” that Defendant TASC collects from each

20 participant is deposited to MCAO.

21

171. MCAO does not publicly disclose how it spends the money it receives

22 from the program.

23

24

25 33 See MCAO/TASC Adult Deferred Prosecution Program Possession of Marijuana, Client Contract ¶ 13.

26 34 Maricopa County Attorney’s Office, Felony Pretrial Intervention Program

27

(2018). 35 Diversion, TASC, http://www.tascsolutions.org/tasc-services/diversion (last

28 visited Aug. 22, 2018).

22

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 23 of 57

1

172. In addition to collecting fees, the Contract between Defendants MCAO

2 and TASC makes Defendant TASC responsible for most of the day-to-day operations

3 of the possession of marijuana diversion program.

4

173. This includes administering drug and alcohol tests, tracking participants’

5 attendance and participation, and determining whether a participant has completed the

6 program requirements.

7

174. MCAO’s duties under the Contract are to assess the appropriateness of

8 referrals to the program and to send qualified participants to Defendant TASC.

9

175. The Contract does not require the MCAO to pay Defendant TASC any

10 money.

11

176. Instead, the Contract provides that the program’s participants alone will

12 pay Defendant TASC, and “no public monies will be expended pursuant to [the

13 Contract].”36

14

177. The Contract does provide that, “[a]t his option, the County Attorney may

15 utilize monies accumulated in the Drug Diversion Fund to satisfy the costs associated

16 with this agreement if the participant is indigent and unable to pay the costs associated

17 with the … diversion program.”37

18

178. But there is no requirement that MCAO make such payments. 38

19

179. Between 2006 and 2016, MCAO made nearly $15 million in fees from

20 participants in the marijuana diversion program.39

21

180. Defendant TASC has also benefited financially from operating the

22 marijuana diversion program.

23

24

25 36 MCAO & TASC, Behavior Specific Adult Diversion Program Contract, at 1 (Mar. 22, 2016, effective through Sept. 30, 2018).

26 37 Id.

27

38 The Contract states, “[U]nder no circumstances is the County liable for any fees or costs related to [the] Contract.” Id.

28 39 Cassidy, supra note 4.

23

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 24 of 57

1

181. Defendant TASC’s net assets were approximately $18 million in 2016.40

2

182. In 2014, TASC paid its CEO $281,165 and its former CEO $963,358.41

3

183. In 2015, TASC paid its CEO $321,347.42

4

184. In 2016, TASC paid its CEO $308,720.43

5 II. Plaintiffs

6

Damages Class Representatives DeShawn Briggs and Mark Pascale

7

185. Class representatives DeShawn Briggs and Mark Pascale were both

8 required to remain in the pretrial diversion program for more than double the time

9 required of similarly situated (but wealthier) participants solely because they were

10 unable to pay program fees.

11

186. Plaintiff DeShawn Briggs is a 28-year-old African American man.

12

187. In December 2015, Mr. Briggs was arrested for simple possession of

13 marijuana.

14

188. At the time of his arrest, Mr. Briggs worked part-time at Walmart, where

15 he made $10 per hour.

16

189. Mr. Briggs had no prior criminal record.

17

190. He was not addicted to marijuana.

18

191. On or around January 13, 2016, Mr. Briggs received a letter from MCAO.

19

192. The letter stated that he had two options with respect to his marijuana

20 arrest: he could face prosecution and conviction with a punishment of two years in jail

21 and a fine of up to $150,000 plus an 80% surcharge—or he could participate in the

22 TASC pretrial diversion program.

23

193. The claims in the letter Mr. Briggs received were false.

24

25

26 40 See IRS Form 990, filed by TASC for 2016, at 1.

27

41 42

See IRS Form 990, filed by TASC for 2014, at 7. See IRS Form 990, filed by TASC for 2015, at 7.

28 43 See IRS Form 990, filed by TASC for 2016, at 7.

24

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 25 of 57

1

194. Because this was Mr. Briggs’ first offense, under Arizona law, he could

2 not receive jail or prison time if convicted of simple possession of marijuana.

3

195. Mr. Briggs also did not face a $150,000 fine.

4

196. Mr. Briggs did not know that he could not receive jail time for conviction

5 of marijuana possession since it was his first offense.

6

197. He also did not know that he could not be fined $150,000.

7

198. Mr. Briggs chose to participate in the pretrial diversion program because

8 he did not want to go to jail and thought the diversion program was the only way to

9 avoid two years of incarceration and a six-figure fine.

10

199. Mr. Briggs followed the instructions given in the letter and contacted

11 TASC to enroll in the program.

12

200. A TASC employee told Mr. Briggs to appear for orientation and bring a

13 $150 intake fee.

14

201. At the orientation, a TASC employee informed Mr. Briggs of the program

15 requirements and fees.

16

202. The TASC employee told Mr. Briggs that he would have to submit to and

17 pass random drug and alcohol tests for 90 days, complete a three-hour drug education

18 class, and pay his program fees of $1000 in full within that 90-day period.

19

203. The TASC employee told Mr. Briggs that the program would either last

20 for 90 days or six months.

21

204. The employee told him that if he tested clean, attended the class, and paid

22 his program fees in full, then he would complete the program in 90 days.

23

205. If he did not complete any of the three requirements in the first 90 days,

24 including payment of fees in full, he would have to stay in the program for an additional

25 three months or be prosecuted for a felony.

26

206. The TASC employee did not ask Mr. Briggs whether he would be able to

27 pay the program and drug and alcohol testing fees.

28 25

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 26 of 57

1

207. Mr. Briggs was told to sign a “statement of facts” as a condition of entry

2 into the program.

3

208. The statement of facts stated that Mr. Briggs possessed a usable quantity

4 of marijuana.

5

209. Mr. Briggs did not consult with an attorney before signing the statement

6 because he could not afford one.

7

210. Because of this, Mr. Briggs believed that if he failed to meet the

8 program’s requirements—including paying the necessary fees—he would go to jail.

9

211. Mr. Briggs passed all of his drug tests during the first 90 days of the

10 program.

11

212. During that time period, Mr. Briggs was required to report for drug and

12 alcohol testing up to three times each week.

13

213. Mr. Briggs was forced to pay each time he reported for a drug and alcohol

14 test, even though he was struggling to pay for basic necessities.

15

214. Mr. Briggs also completed the required three-hour drug education

16 seminar during his first 90 days on the program.

17

215. However, in that first 90 days, Mr. Briggs could not afford to pay the

18 $1000 fee.

19

216. Mr. Briggs’s monthly pay at Walmart was less than $1000.

20

217. Mr. Briggs also has disabilities caused by spinal meningitis that limit his

21 ability to work.

22

218. During the first 90 days of the program, Mr. Briggs was only able to pay

23 $421 toward the $1000 balance.

24

219. Mr. Briggs made those payments in small installments.

25

220. He paid one $75 installment toward his $150 orientation fee on February

26 29, 2016.

27

221. He paid the second installment on April 14, 2016.

28 26

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 27 of 57

1

222. On that same date, Mr. Briggs paid another $95 toward his balance.

2

223. On May 5, 2016, Mr. Briggs paid $170 toward his balance.

3

224. On May 11, 2016, he paid another $16.

4

225. During that same time period, Mr. Briggs paid approximately $195 for

5 drug and alcohol tests.

6

226. Despite meeting all other program requirements, Mr. Briggs was not

7 considered for program completion at the 90-day mark because he had not paid the

8 $1000 fee in full.

9

227. Instead, Mr. Briggs was required to remain on diversion, and remained

10 subject to felony criminal prosecution.

11

228. Mr. Briggs was also required to continue reporting to drug and alcohol

12 testing one to three times each week.

13

229. After the first 90 days on the program, Mr. Briggs reported for and passed

14 15 additional drug and alcohol tests.

15

230. The final drug and alcohol test that Mr. Briggs submitted to and paid for

16 was on August 23, 2016.

17

231. In total, the 15 drug and alcohol tests that Mr. Briggs had to take during

18 the pay-only period cost Mr. Briggs approximately $225.

19

232. Mr. Briggs also continued to make payments against his balance.

20

233. On June 16, 2016, Mr. Briggs paid $170.

21

234. On July 14, 2016, he paid $70.

22

235. On August 18, 2016, he paid $50.

23

236. Finally, on August 25, 2016, Mr. Briggs paid a final installment of $275.

24

237. When Mr. Briggs made this final payment, a TASC employee told

25 Mr. Briggs that had successfully completed the program and that he should return to

26 the TASC office the next day to receive his certificate of completion.

27

28 27

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 28 of 57

1

238. Mr. Briggs returned to the TASC offices the following day and received

2 a certification of completion from TASC.

3

239. Plaintiff Mark Pascale is a 60-year-old man.

4

240. Mr. Pascale lives in Maricopa County, Arizona with his 15-year-old son,

5 for whom he is the sole provider.

6

241. Mr. Pascale is disabled; he suffers from degenerative disc disease in his

7 neck and back.

8

242. To manage his symptoms, Mr. Pascale takes an anti-epileptic drug, an

9 anti-convulsant drug, and morphine every day.

10

243. Because of his illness, Mr. Pascale has been physically unable to work

11 since 2008.

12

244. That year, Mr. Pascale filed for bankruptcy.

13

245. Mr. Pascale’s only stable source of income comes from federal disability

14 benefits.

15

246. Mr. Pascale also receives nutritional assistance benefits and, in the past,

16 has received assistance from government programs to pay his utility bills.

17

247. In May 2017, a police officer found a small amount of marijuana in

18 Mr. Pascale’s car.

19

248. Mr. Pascale was not arrested, but he received a criminal summons in the

20 mail in October 2017, stating that he was being charged with possession or use of

21 marijuana, a class 6 felony.

22

249. At his first court appearance, Mr. Pascale agreed to enroll in the

23 marijuana diversion program.

24

250. Mr. Pascale was not addicted to marijuana.

25

251. Mr. Pascale attended an orientation for the program on November 21,

26 2017.

27

28 28

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 29 of 57

1

252. Mr. Pascale could not afford to pay the $150 application fee that TASC

2 requires at orientation.

3

253. A TASC employee agreed to allow Mr. Pascale to pay $75 up front

4 instead of $150 to attend the orientation.

5

254. The remaining $75 was added to Mr. Pascale’s bill, and he was required

6 to pay it before he could complete the diversion program.

7

255. During the orientation, a TASC employee told Mr. Pascale that he could

8 complete the program in 90 days if he did not fail any drug and alcohol tests and paid

9 all required fees in full.

10

256. When Mr. Pascale reported for his first mandatory drug and alcohol test,

11 he told his case worker at TASC that he could not afford to pay the $950 in program

12 fees.44

13

257. He also told her that he could not afford to pay $15 or $17 for drug and

14 alcohol testing weekly or multiple times each week.

15

258. Mr. Pascale’s case worker told him that there was no way to waive or

16 reduce the program fees.

17

259. However, she explained, his drug and alcohol testing fees could

18 potentially be reduced to $7 per test instead of $15 per test.

19

260. The case worker gave Mr. Pascale a financial information form to

20 complete.

21

261. On the form, Mr. Pascale marked that he was disabled and worked zero

22 hours per week.

23

262. He listed his income as $920 per month, explaining that he received

24 disability benefits.

25

26

27 44 Because Mr. Pascale was not arrested, he did not have to pay the $50 booking 28 fee.
29

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 30 of 57

1

263. The case worker told Mr. Pascale that he did not qualify for reduced drug

2 and alcohol testing fees because he owned a computer and was paying for internet

3 service, which are “luxuries.”

4

264. Mr. Pascale therefore had to pay the full $15 for each required drug and

5 alcohol test.

6

265. These payments, made out of his disability income, made it difficult for

7 Mr. Pascale to pay for basic necessities for himself and his son, including food, shelter,

8 medication, and clothing.

9

266. Mr. Pascale was tested at least once per week, but as often as three times

10 per week.

11

267. At least once each month, Mr. Pascale would be asked to submit to

12 additional drug and alcohol testing because he had tested positive for opiates due to the

13 prescription medications he takes.

14

268. Mr. Pascale had provided his case worker with information and

15 documentation about the prescription medications that he takes (including morphine),

16 but even so, she ordered the extra testing.

17

269. Mr. Pascale had to pay for these additional tests as well.

18

270. Mr. Pascale frequently emphasized to his case worker that he did not have

19 the money to pay for drug and alcohol tests.

20

271. The case worker told Mr. Pascale that he had to pay in order to be tested

21 and suggested he borrow money.

22

272. Mr. Pascale often skipped paying bills to keep up with the fees.

23

273. After 90 days had passed, Mr. Pascale had met all non-monetary program

24 requirements and had never failed a drug and alcohol test.

25

274. He had not, however, finished paying the $950 he owed in program fees.

26

275. As a result, Mr. Pascale was required to remain on diversion until all of

27 the fees were paid.

28 30

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 31 of 57

1

276. During this time, he was still required to submit to and pay for drug and

2 alcohol testing up to three times each week.

3

277. Mr. Pascale made his final payment—and submitted to and passed his

4 final drug and alcohol test—on June 29, 2018, more than seven months after he had

5 entered the program.

6

278. When Mr. Pascale told his case worker that he had paid his program fees

7 in full, she told him that he had successfully completed the program and issued a

8 certificate of completion dated July 5, 2018.

9

Damages and Injunctive Relief Class Representative Lucia Soria

10

279. Plaintiff Lucia Soria is a 38-year-old Latina woman.

11

280. Ms. Soria is a single mother. She has a son and daughter, both of whom

12 are teenagers. She lives with her parents, her children, and members of her extended

13 family.

14

281. Ms. Soria is unemployed and without income because her ability to work

15 is severely limited by her medical conditions, which include diabetes and neuropathy.

16 In November 2018, Ms. Soria’s doctor advised her to stop working because of her

17 medical conditions.

18

282. Ms. Soria left her employment as an assistant manager at Dollar Tree

19 shortly after receiving this advice from her doctor.

20

283. In December 2018, Ms. Soria was driving friends home when she was

21 pulled over. The officer alleged he found marijuana in the car, but Ms. Soria was not

22 arrested or cited.

23

284. On or around March 25, 2019, Ms. Soria received a letter from Defendant

24 MCAO about the marijuana diversion program.

25

285. The letter gave her a choice: she could agree to participate in the TASC

26 diversion program or she would face felony prosecution.

27

28 31

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 32 of 57

1

286. The letter threatened Ms. Soria that, if convicted, she could be sentenced

2 to two years of imprisonment and a fine of up to $150,000, plus an 83% surcharge.

3

287. These threats were false.

4

288. Because Ms. Soria had never been convicted of possessing marijuana, she

5 could not receive jail or prison time if convicted of simple possession of marijuana

6 under Arizona law.

7

289. Nor was Ms. Soria eligible for a $150,000 fine.

8

290. But Ms. Soria believed the threats Defendant MCAO made in the letter.

9

291. Ms. Soria decided to enroll in the diversion program because she did not

10 want to be fined $150,000 or spend two years in prison.

11

292. Ms. Soria attended orientation for the marijuana diversion program after

12 receiving the letter in March 2019.

13

293. Ms. Soria was told that the program would cost approximately $950.

14

294. At orientation, Ms. Soria told the TASC employee who facilitated the

15 orientation class that she had no income and could not afford the fees. The TASC

16 employee responded by saying “it’s not up to me,” and told Ms. Soria that she had to

17 pay the fees or she could not participate in TASC.

18

295. The TASC employee also told Ms. Soria that in order to complete the

19 program in 90 days, she would have to submit to and pass random drug and alcohol

20 tests, attend a three-hour drug and alcohol seminar, and pay the $950 program fee within

21 that time period. Further, the TASC employee told Ms. Soria that if she were unable to

22 meet any of the three requirements—including full payment of program fees—she

23 would remain under TASC supervision in the diversion program.

24

296. Ms. Soria had to sign the “Client Contract” during orientation, which,

25 among other things, stated that she would be terminated from the program if she did

26 not make minimum monthly payments required by Defendant TASC.

27

28 32

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 33 of 57

1

297. The Client Contract Ms. Soria signed set the minimum monthly payment

2 at $160 or $170.

3

298. The TASC employee also told Ms. Soria that, in addition to the program

4 fee, she would have to pay $15 each time she submitted to a drug and alcohol test.

5

299. Ms. Soria was not offered a fee waiver or fee reduction at orientation or

6 any other time during her tenure under TASC supervision.

7

300. Ms. Soria has submitted to one to three drug and alcohol tests every week

8 since she started the marijuana diversion program.

9

301. When Ms. Soria first started on the marijuana diversion program, the

10 closest location where she could test was approximately a 45-minute drive each way

11 from her home if there was no traffic.

12

302. During her time on the program, a TASC location has opened closer to

13 her house, but it is still a 30-minute drive each way from her home.

14

303. Ms. Soria often has to rely on her daughter to drive her to and from TASC

15 when she has to test.

16

304. Ms. Soria borrows money from her parents or her daughter when she has

17 to submit to drug and alcohol tests, because she fears that if she cannot pay for the test,

18 she will not be allowed to test and will be terminated from the program.

19

305. Ms. Soria cannot borrow money from her family members to pay off the

20 rest of the program fees because they cannot afford to give her the money.

21

306. Ms. Soria’s family has helped her pay off portions of the program fees in

22 the past with money received from tax refunds but they currently cannot afford to give

23 her money to pay off any more of the program fees.

24

307. On July 15, 2019, Ms. Soria asked her case worker, Viviana Garcia, when

25 her 90 days would be over and she would be off the program.

26

308. Ms. Garcia replied: “Your anticipated completion date is on 7/29/19 as

27 long as you have a zero balance . . . .”

28 33

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 34 of 57

1

309. Ms. Soria asked, “what could I do if I can’t pay the 440.00 [I] still owe

2 by the 29th” and informed Ms. Garcia that she “still do[esn’t] have a job.”

3

310. Ms. Garcia replied: “If you are unable to pay of[f] your fees in full by

4 7/29/19 you will continue to comply with the program.”

5

311. Ms. Soria did not violate any program rules or policies between July 15,

6 2019 and July 29, 2019, the date she would have completed the program if she could

7 have afforded to pay the program fees.

8

312. Ms. Soria could not afford to pay the program fees in full by July 29,

9 2019—and still cannot afford to pay the program fees in full—and thus remains on the

10 program solely because she could not and cannot afford to pay the program fees.

11

313. Ms. Soria also cannot afford to pay Defendant TASC’s standard monthly

12 minimum payment of $160 or $170 per month, which was set forth in the Client

13 Contract to which she is subject.

14

314. Pursuant to Defendants’ written policy, if Ms. Soria cannot afford to

15 make the minimum monthly payment she will be terminated from the diversion

16 program.

17

315. Pursuant to Defendants’ policies, practices, and customs, if Ms. Soria is

18 terminated from the diversion program, she will be prosecuted for felony possession of

19 marijuana.

20

316. At orientation, Ms. Soria was told to sign a statement of facts confessing

21 to possession of marijuana as a condition of entering the program.

22

317. Ms. Soria believed that signing the statement in order to enter the

23 diversion program was the only way that she could avoid prosecution and potential for

24 a two-year prison sentence and a $150,000 fine.

25

318. Arizona law allows this confession to be used against Ms. Soria in court.

26

319. Accordingly, Ms. Soria believes that if she is prosecuted, she will be

27 convicted of felony marijuana possession because she signed the confession.

28 34

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 35 of 57

1

Injunctive Relief Class Representative McKenna Stephens

2

320. Plaintiff McKenna Stephens is a 24-year-old white woman.

3

321. Ms. Stephens works as a part-time server at a restaurant.

4

322. On October 29, 2016, Ms. Stephens was sitting with a friend in a car when

5 they were approached by two police officers.

6

323. The officers searched the car and found a small amount of marijuana and

7 marijuana paraphernalia in the vehicle.

8

324. Ms. Stephens was arrested for possession of marijuana.

9

325. She was booked into a local jail and released.

10

326. The arresting officer told Ms. Stephens that she would receive a letter in

11 the mail regarding next steps.

12

327. Ms. Stephens had no prior criminal convictions.

13

328. She was not addicted to marijuana.

14

329. On August 3, 2018—nearly two years after she was arrested for

15 marijuana possession—Ms. Stephens received a letter from Defendant MCAO about

16 the marijuana arrest.

17

330. The letter gave her a choice: she could agree to participate in the TASC

18 diversion program or she would face felony prosecution.

19

331. The letter threatened Ms. Stephens that, if convicted, she could be

20 sentenced to two years of imprisonment and a fine of up to $150,000, plus an 80%

21 surcharge.

22

332. These threats were false.

23

333. Because this was Ms. Stephens’s first marijuana arrest, under Arizona

24 law, she could not receive jail or prison time if convicted of simple possession of

25 marijuana.

26

334. Nor was Ms. Stephens eligible for a $150,000 fine.

27

28 35

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 36 of 57

1

335. But Ms. Stephens believed the threats Defendant MCAO made in the

2 letter.

3

336. She decided to enroll in the diversion program because she did not want

4 to be fined $150,000 or spend two years in prison.

5

337. Prior to orientation for the diversion program, a TASC employee told Ms.

6 Stephens that she would have to pay $150 in order to attend orientation and begin the

7 program.

8

338. Ms. Stephens attended orientation for the marijuana diversion program

9 on September 18, 2018.

10

339. That same day, Ms. Stephens paid $150 to TASC.

11

340. During the orientation, a TASC employee told Ms. Stephens that in order

12 to complete the program in 90 days, she would have to submit to and pass random drug

13 and alcohol tests, attend a three-hour drug and alcohol seminar, and pay the $1000

14 program fee within that time period.

15

341. The TASC employee told Ms. Stephens that if she were unable to meet

16 any of the three requirements—including full payment of program fees—within 90

17 days, she would have to stay in the diversion program for at least six months and until

18 the program fees were paid.

19

342. The TASC employee also told Ms. Stephens that, in addition to the $1000

20 program fee, she would have to pay $15 each time she submitted to a drug and alcohol

21 test.

22

343. Ms. Stephens informed the TASC employee that she had a medical

23 marijuana card and was legally able to use marijuana.

24

344. The TASC employee told her that she could use marijuana while on the

25 marijuana diversion program, but that Ms. Stephens would still have to submit to and

26 pay for random drug and alcohol tests.

27

28 36

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 37 of 57

1

345. During her first week in the marijuana diversion program, Defendants

2 required Ms. Stephens to submit to four drug and alcohol tests.

3

346. Defendants required Ms. Stephens to pay $15 for each of the four drug

4 and alcohol tests.

5

347. Ms. Stephens intends to fulfill all of the non-monetary requirements of

6 the diversion program within the first 90 days.

7

348. However, Ms. Stephens cannot afford to pay the $1000 program fee

8 within 90 days.

9

349. Ms. Stephens’s sole income is the $600 or $700 she makes each month

10 as a part-time server.

11

350. Ms. Stephens’s allocates almost 100% of her income towards paying her

12 bills and expenses, which includes her car payment, insurance, gas, and phone service.

13

351. In order to complete diversion within 90 days, Ms. Stephens would have

14 to pay well over $300 each month.

15

352. Ms. Stephens could not pay this amount without defaulting on bill

16 payments and sacrificing basic necessities.

17

353. Because Ms. Stephens cannot pay the $1000 program fees within 90 days,

18 pursuant to Defendants’ policy, practice, and custom, she will be required to remain on

19 diversion (and subject to the diversion program’s requirements) for at least six months

20 and until she is able to pay the $1000 program fee.

21

354. Without sacrificing basic necessities or defaulting on bills, Ms. Stephens

22 also cannot afford to pay Defendant TASC’s standard monthly minimum payment of

23 $160 or $170 per month, which was set forth in the Client Contract to which she is

24 subject.

25

26

27

28 37

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 38 of 57

1

355. If Ms. Stephens cannot afford to make the minimum monthly payment,

2 pursuant to Defendants’ written policy, she will be terminated from the diversion

3 program.45

4

356. Pursuant to Defendants’ policies, practices, and customs, if Ms. Stephens

5 is terminated from the diversion program, she will be prosecuted for felony possession

6 of marijuana.

7

357. At orientation, Ms. Stephens was told to sign a statement of facts

8 confessing to possession of marijuana as a condition of entering the program.

9

358. Ms. Stephens believed that signing the statement in order to enter the

10 diversion program was the only way that she could avoid prosecution and potential

11 confinement for two years and a $150,000 fine.

12

359. Arizona law allows this confession to be used against Ms. Stephens in

13 court.

14

360. Accordingly, Ms. Stephens believes that if she is prosecuted, she will be

15 convicted of felony marijuana possession because she signed the confession.

16

Individual Plaintiff Taja Collier

17

361. Plaintiff Taja Collier is a 21-year-old African American woman.

18

362. On October 7, 2016, Ms. Collier was riding in a car with friends when the

19 car was pulled over by a police officer for making an improper turn.

20

363. The officer searched the car’s occupants and found a small cylinder in

21 Ms. Collier’s purse that contained trace amounts of marijuana.

22

364. The amount of marijuana in the container was so small that the police

23 officer did not weigh it.

24

365. Ms. Collier was placed under arrest for possession of marijuana.

25

366. Ms. Collier had no prior criminal record.

26

27 45 Id. ¶ 12 ( “Failure to make payments [toward the program fees] each month as 28 agreed will result in [the] case being returned for prosecution.”
38

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 39 of 57

1

367. Ms. Collier was not addicted to marijuana.

2

368. In early Spring 2017, Ms. Collier received a letter from MCAO.

3

369. The letter gave her two choices: she could face felony charges for

4 marijuana possession, or she could agree to participate in the TASC diversion program.

5

370. The letter warned Ms. Collier that if convicted, she could be sentenced to

6 two years in jail and a fine of up to $150,000, plus an 80% surcharge.

7

371. These threats were false.

8

372. Because this was Ms. Collier’s first offense, under Arizona law, she could

9 not receive jail or prison time if convicted of simple possession of marijuana.

10

373. Nor was Ms. Collier eligible for a $150,000 fine.

11

374. But Ms. Collier believed the threats in the letter.

12

375. She decided to enroll in the TASC diversion program because she did not

13 want to be fined $150,000 or spend two years in prison.

14

376. At the time of her arrest, Mr. Collier was a sophomore at Central Arizona

15 College, where she studied social work.

16

377. Central Arizona College is located in Casa Grande, Arizona, which is

17 almost an hour away from Phoenix.

18

378. When Ms. Collier learned that the TASC diversion program required

19 drug and alcohol testing in Phoenix multiple times each week, she decided she could

20 not go back to college while she was on the TASC program.

21

379. Ms. Collier did not have a car or money to make such a long trip so

22 frequently.

23

380. She had to stop attending school and move to Phoenix in order to

24 participate in the diversion program.

25

381. Ms. Collier was told that she would need to pay $150 at the orientation in

26 order to start the program.

27

382. She planned to start the program on June 22, 2017.

28 39

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 40 of 57

1

383. That week, however, Ms. Collier realized she would not be able to come

2 up with the $150 required to start the program.

3

384. Ms. Collier had recently started a job working part-time at a Target.

4

385. Ms. Collier made around minimum wage and worked approximately 16

5 hours per week.

6

386. However, she had not yet received her first paycheck.

7

387. Ms. Collier called TASC’s main office to tell them that she could not

8 afford to pay the $150 fee.

9

388. No one called her back.

10

389. At 6:51 a.m. on the morning her orientation was set to begin, Ms. Collier

11 sent an email to the general email address for the possession of marijuana diversion

12 program.

13

390. The email read, “Hi, my name is Taja Collier. I called the office to

14 reschedule my appointment 2 days ago and have not received a call back. I left a

15 message for the corporate office and nod [sic] I’m sending this email. I had an

16 appointment today at 8:45 and I do not have 150 because I get my first check next week.

17 I do not want my file sent back to the court system.”

18

391. Later the same day, Ms. Collier reached a TASC employee by phone and

19 rescheduled her orientation for July 6, 2017.

20

392. Several days later, however, on June 25, 2017, Ms. Collier learned that

21 she would not be paid until after July 9, 2017.

22

393. Ms. Collier wrote again to the email address for the possession of

23 marijuana diversion program and informed TASC that she needed to reschedule the

24 orientation for after she got paid.

25

394. A TASC employee rescheduled Ms. Collier’s orientation for July 13,

26 2017.

27

28 40

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 41 of 57

1

395. The employee did not tell her that she could start the program even if she

2 did not pay.

3

396. The employee also did not tell her that she could apply for a fee waiver

4 or a fee reduction.

5

397. On July 13, 2017, Ms. Collier paid $150 to TASC and attended the

6 mandatory orientation.

7

398. Shortly after her orientation, Ms. Collier was informed by the case

8 manager that had been assigned to her that she had to submit to a drug and alcohol test

9 and that she had to pay for the test in order to take it.

10

399. Ms. Collier was willing to take the mandatory test, but she could not

11 afford the $15 or $17 fee to pay for it.

12

400. Ms. Collier again emailed the address for the possession of marijuana

13 diversion program.

14

401. In her email, Ms. Collier pleaded: “I won’t be able to come up with the

15 fee money until next Friday. I keep calling [my case manager] to figure out what my

16 next steps should be. Is there anyway [sic] I can change case managers or get some

17 assistance?”

18

402. No one responded to the email.

19

403. Nor did anyone call Ms. Collier to follow up.

20

404. Ultimately, Ms. Collier could not take the test because she could not

21 afford to pay for it.

22

405. To pay for her drug tests going forward, Ms. Collier began to sell her own

23 blood plasma whenever she was called to test.

24

406. Whenever Ms. Collier would learn that she had a drug test, she would

25 schedule a blood plasma sale so that she could pay for the test.

26

407. Ms. Collier made $20 to $35 each time she sold her blood plasma.

27

28 41

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 42 of 57

1

408. However, according to the blood plasma center’s rules, a person is only

2 allowed to sell blood plasma twice each week.

3

409. Therefore, weeks when Ms. Collier was called to drug test more than

4 twice were especially difficult for her to manage.

5

410. After she sold her blood plasma, Ms. Collier often felt fatigued and dizzy,

6 like she couldn’t breathe or might black out.

7

411. But she continued to sell her blood plasma because it was the only way

8 she could pay for the drug tests.

9

412. Ms. Collier told her case manager at TASC that she sold her blood plasma

10 to pay for drug tests.

11

413. The case manager never told her that she could take the tests without

12 paying for them at the time of the test.

13

414. The case manager also never told her that she could apply for a reduced

14 fee.

15

415. At times, even after selling her blood plasma, Ms. Collier could not afford

16 to take drug and alcohol tests at TASC.

17

416. When this happened, Ms. Collier could not take required drug and alcohol

18 tests because she was not allowed to test if she could not pay for it.

19

417. Instead, Ms. Collier would try to contact her case manager to tell her that

20 she could not afford to pay to test.

21

418. Frequently, Ms. Collier’s case manager would not answer her phone or

22 respond to emails, and Ms. Collier would try to reach her by calling TASC’s corporate

23 office.

24

419. In September 2017, Ms. Collier became homeless.

25

420. She remained homeless for approximately one month.

26

421. While she was homeless, Ms. Collier slept in public parks.

27

422. On September 20, 2017, Ms. Collier emailed her case manager.

28 42

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 43 of 57

1

423. She explained, “I have been homeless for the passed [sic] week so money

2 has been really tight. … It has been really tough.”

3

424. Ms. Collier also told her case manager in the email that she planned to

4 start Job Corps and that she would be able to pay for drug and alcohol tests once she

5 started.

6

425. Ms. Collier’s case manager responded five days later.

7

426. In her email, the case manager replied:

8

“Sorry to hear that you are going through this. I am hoping

9

things get better for you. I also noticed that since you are

on your FINAL NOTICE, any missed test past this point

10

will result in program termination. So I am happy to hear

11

that you are going to do whatever is possible to test next

time you are required to test. Good Luck and hope

12

everything works out for you.”

13

427. Again, the case manager did not suggest that Ms. Collier could take the

14 tests without paying for them.

15

428. Nor did she invite her to apply for a reduced fee.

16

429. Shortly after this exchange, Ms. Collier was issued another violation

17 because she did not take drug and alcohol tests solely because she could not afford to

18 pay for them.

19

430. On October 10, 2017, TASC reported to MCAO that Ms. Collier had

20 failed the diversion program.

21

431. In its reasons for failing Ms. Collier, TASC listed that Ms. Collier had not

22 submitted to mandatory drug and alcohol tests.

23

432. As described above, Ms. Collier did not take these tests solely because

24 she could not afford to pay for them.

25

433. TASC also stated that Ms. Collier was being failed because she had not

26 paid the required TASC fee and had not paid the required drug fund assessment fee.46

27 46

In addition, TASC stated that Ms. Collier had not attended the program’s

28 mandatory seminar. However, participants are required to take this seminar before they

43

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 44 of 57

1

434. On December 8, 2017, MCAO filed felony charges against Ms. Collier

2 for possession of marijuana.

3

435. Ms. Collier’s preliminary hearing was on January 22, 2018.

4

436. On that same date, Ms. Collier agreed to re-enroll in the TASC possession

5 of marijuana diversion program.

6

437. Ms. Collier’s prosecution was suspended for two years to allow her to

7 complete TASC.

8

438. Ms. Collier knew that she would struggle to pay for diversion.

9

439. But she decided to re-enroll because—based on the false threats in the

10 letter that she received from MCAO—she believed that she would go to jail if she did

11 not complete diversion.

12

440. To re-enter the program, Ms. Collier was again required to pay the $150

13 admissions fee.

14

441. Ms. Collier paid $148 toward that amount on March 13, 2018.

15

442. Ms. Collier paid the remaining $2 on May 24, 2018.

16

443. Since that time, Ms. Collier has made payments of between $8 and $20.

17

444. Ms. Collier still must pay $667 to TASC before she can complete the

18 program.

19

445. Ms. Collier cannot afford this sum without sacrificing basic necessities

20 like food and housing.

21

446. Nor can she afford to pay it at the rate required by Defendant TASC in

22 the Client Contract.

23

can successfully complete the program; they are not required to take it at a specific 24 time. Ms. Collier would not have been failed from the diversion program solely because

25 she had not yet completed the seminar. The only other reason TASC provided for failing Ms. Collier was that she did not respond to a non-compliance letter she received on

26 August 7, 2017. But Ms. Collier was in contact with her case manager after receiving

27

this letter and explained that she could not afford to pay for drug and alcohol tests. In addition, TASC does not have a policy, practice, or custom of failing diversion

28 participants who do not respond to a letter.

44

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 45 of 57

1

447. Ms. Collier is also still required to submit to drug and alcohol testing—at

2 $15 or $17 per test—one to three times each week.

3

448. TASC still will not allow Ms. Collier to complete drug and alcohol tests

4 unless she pays for them.

5

449. Ms. Collier therefore continues to sell her blood plasma whenever she

6 knows she is going to be drug tested so that she can pay for the tests.

7

450. On August 17, 2018, Ms. Collier sent an e-mail to her case manager.

8

451. Ms. Collier wrote:

9

“Tasc has really been putting a big strain on my pockets. …

10

I am very concerned that I will end up homeless again

trying to sacrifice rent for tasc as this is putting Me [sic] in

11

a bad space. I have been donating plasma whenever I have

12

to test to get the money I need to pay for it, but I am afraid

it is affecting my health. I am willing to test whenever I’m

13

required but I cannot afford the fees. Is there anyway [sic]

that I can test without having to pay for it?” 14

15

452. Ms. Collier’s case worker replied, “You have to pay for the program in

16 order to complete the program. I understand that this is cost effective [sic] but in order

17 for you to have you [sic] felony dismissed with prejudice you will have to complete all

18 program requirement [sic] which includes paying all fees associated with the

19 program.”47

20

453. On September 4, 2018, Ms. Collier was scheduled to submit to a drug and

21 alcohol test at TASC.

22

454. Ms. Collier did not have any money to pay for the drug test.

23

455. Nevertheless, at approximately 6 p.m., Ms. Collier reported to the TASC

24 office in Phoenix to submit to a test.

25

26
27 47 In her response, the case worker also suggested that Ms. Collier could apply for insurance to alleviate the costs of one of the mandatory treatment classes. This would
28 do nothing to relieve the costs of program fees or the fees for drug and alcohol tests. 45

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 46 of 57

1

456. When she arrived, Ms. Collier told a male TASC staff member that she

2 was willing to take the drug and alcohol test, but that she could not pay the fee that day.

3

457. The TASC staff member told Ms. Collier that if she did not have the

4 money, she could not take the drug and alcohol test.

5

CLASS ACTION ALLEGATIONS

6

458. The named Plaintiffs bring this case as a class action pursuant to Rules

7 23(a), 23(b)(2), and 23(b)(3) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

8

459. The Classes are defined as follows:

9

a. Damages Class: All people who, since August 23, 2016, and until the trial

10

of this case, (1) were enrolled in the marijuana diversion program

11

operated by Defendants TASC and MCAO; (2) satisfied all program

12

requirements in the first 90 days of the program other than payment of

13

program fees; and (3) were not considered for successful completion after

14

90 days solely because they were unable to pay the required fees. Named

15

Plaintiffs Deshawn Briggs, Mark Pascale, and Lucia Soria seek

16

certification of this class.

17

b. Injunctive Class: All people who (1) have not yet been formally charged

18

with possession of marijuana; (2) received a pre-filing letter offering

19

participation in the MCAO and TASC marijuana diversion program; and

20

(3) are unable to pay the required program fees within 90 days and/or at

21

the rate required by Defendant TASC. Named Plaintiffs McKenna

22

Stephens and Lucia Soria seek certification of this class.

23

460. The class members are readily ascertainable: the names and relevant

24 records of the class members are in Defendants’ possession.

25

Numerosity: Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(a)(1)

26

461. On information and belief, both Classes include at least several hundred

27 members.

28 46

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 47 of 57

1

462. During the 2017 fiscal year (July 1, 2016 through July 30, 2017), there

2 were 2687 admittances to the possession of marijuana diversion program.

3

463. The marijuana diversion program has maintained similar numbers of

4 admittances in its last several years of operation.

5

464. Therefore, there were likely at least 2500 admittances in the 2018 fiscal

6 year.

7

465. Thus, if even a small percentage of the people admitted to TASC since

8 August 23, 2016 meet the requirements for the Classes, the Classes would number in

9 the hundreds.

10

466. Moreover, on information and belief, a large majority of those arrested

11 and prosecuted for marijuana possession in Maricopa County are deemed indigent for

12 the purposes of appointment of counsel.

13

Commonality: Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(a)(2)

14

467. The Class members’ claims raise common issues of fact and law.

15

468. With respect to the Damages Class, those common questions include, but

16 are not limited to:

17

a. Whether Defendants have a policy, practice, and custom of refusing

18

to consider diversion participants for program completion after 90

19

days and beyond solely because they cannot afford to pay the required

20

fees, without inquiring into those participants’ ability to pay;

21

b. Whether Defendants have a policy, practice, and custom of requiring

22

diversion participants who have not paid the required fees to remain

23

on diversion supervision until they have done so, without inquiring

24

into those participants’ ability to pay;

25

c. Whether Defendants’ diversion extension policies (in subparagraphs

26

(a) and (b)) violate the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of

27

the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution;

28 47

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 48 of 57

1

d. Whether Defendants have a policy, practice, and custom of requiring

2

diversion participants who remain on diversion solely due to inability

3

to pay to continue to submit to and pay for random drug and alcohol

4

tests; and

5

e. Whether Defendants’ policy of continuing this mandatory drug and

6

alcohol testing for participants who remain on the diversion program

7

solely due to inability to pay violates the Fourth Amendment to the

8

U.S. Constitution.

9

469. With respect to the Injunctive Class, those common questions include,

10 but are not limited to:

11

a. Whether Defendants have a policy, practice, and custom of refusing

12

to consider diversion participants for program completion after 90

13

days and beyond solely because they cannot afford to pay the required

14

fees, without inquiring into those participants’ ability to pay;

15

b. Whether Defendants have a policy, practice, and custom of requiring

16

diversion participants who have not paid the required fees to remain

17

on diversion supervision until they have done so, without inquiring

18

into those participants’ ability to pay;

19

c. Whether Defendants’ diversion extension policies (in subparagraphs

20

(a) and (b)) violate the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of

21

the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution;

22

d. Whether Defendants have a policy, practice, and custom of requiring

23

diversion participants who remain on diversion solely due to inability

24

to pay to continue to submit to and pay for random drug and alcohol

25

tests;

26

e. Whether Defendants’ policy of continuing this mandatory drug and

27

alcohol testing for participants who remain on the diversion program

28 48

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 49 of 57

1

solely due to inability to pay violates the Fourth Amendment to the

2

U.S. Constitution;

3

f. Whether Defendants have a policy, practice, and custom of requiring

4

diversion participants to make a minimum monthly payment and

5

terminating those who fail to do so, without inquiring into those

6

participants’ ability to pay; and

7

g. Whether Defendants’ policy of terminating participants who cannot

8

afford to make a minimum monthly payment violates the Due Process

9

and Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment to the

10

U.S. Constitution.

11

Typicality: Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(a)(3)

12

470. The Named Plaintiffs’ claims are typical of the claims of the members of

13 the Class, and they have the same interests in this case as all other members of the Class

14 that they represent.

15

471. The determination whether the Defendants’ scheme of policies, practices,

16 and customs is unlawful in the ways alleged will determine the claims of the named

17 Plaintiffs and every other class member.

18

Adequacy: Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(a)(4)

19

472. Named Plaintiffs are capable of fairly and adequately protecting the

20 interests of the Class because Named Plaintiffs do not have any interests antagonistic

21 to the Class.

22

473. There are no known conflicts of interest among class members, all of

23 whom have a similar interest in vindicating the constitutional rights to which they are

24 entitled.

25

474. Plaintiffs’ counsel are experienced in civil rights litigation and have

26 successfully litigated a number of civil rights class action cases.

27

28 49

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 50 of 57

1

475. Many of those cases, like this one, involve unconstitutional penalties

2 based solely on wealth status.

3

Predomination, Injunctive Class: Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(b)(2)

4

476. Class treatment under Rule 23(b)(2) is appropriate because the common

5 questions of law and fact predominate in this case.

6

477. For Named Plaintiffs McKenna Stephens and Lucia Soria, as well as for

7 the members of the Class, this case turns on what the Defendants’ policies and practices

8 are and on whether those policies are lawful.

9

478. The common questions of law and fact listed above are dispositive

10 questions in the case for every member of the Class.

11

479. Because the putative Class challenges the Defendants’ scheme as

12 unconstitutional through injunctive relief that would apply to every member of the

13 Class, Rule 23(b)(2) certification is proper.

14

Predomination, Damages Class: Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(b)(3)

15

480. Class treatment under Rule 23(b)(3) is appropriate because the common

16 questions of law and fact overwhelmingly predominate in this case.

17

481. For every Named Plaintiff, as well as for the members of the Class, this

18 case turns on what the Defendants’ policies and practices are and on whether those

19 policies are lawful.

20

482. The common questions of law and fact listed above are dispositive

21 questions in the case of every member of the Class.

22

483. Moreover, the question of liability can therefore be determined on a class-

23 wide basis.

24

484. To the extent that individual damages will vary, they will vary depending

25 in large part on the amount of time that a person was subjected to the unlawful scheme

26 and the amount of money coerced from them.

27

28 50

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 51 of 57

1

485. Determining damages for individual class members can thus typically be

2 handled in a ministerial fashion based on easily verifiable records in the Defendants’

3 possession.

4

486. If need be, individual hearings on class members’ specific damages based

5 on special circumstances and particular hardships caused by Defendants’ scheme can

6 be held after class-wide liability is determined.

7

CLAIMS FOR RELIEF

8

Count One: Wealth-Based Discrimination in Violation of the

9

Fourteenth Amendment

10 Brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 by Named Plaintiffs DeShawn Briggs, Mark Pascale,

and Lucia Soria on behalf of themselves and all others similarly situated against all

11

Defendants for damages.

12

13

487. Defendants, acting in concert under color of state law, enacted, enforced,

14 and continue to enforce a policy, practice, and custom of subjecting diversion

15 participants to longer terms of diversion supervision while under threat of felony

16 prosecution, which include in-person reporting, drug and alcohol testing requirements,

17 and increased payments, solely because of their inability to pay fees associated with the

18 program.

19

488. This policy, practice, and custom of penalizing individuals based solely

20 on wealth status violates the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of the

21 Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

22

489. As a direct and proximate cause of Defendants’ unlawful policy, practice,

23 and custom, Plaintiffs have suffered violations of their constitutional rights and thus are

24 entitled to compensatory damages for their injuries.

25

490. Defendant TASC’s actions were willful, deliberate, and malicious, and

26 involved reckless or callous indifference to Plaintiffs’ constitutional rights.

27 Accordingly, Plaintiffs are entitled to recover punitive damages—in addition to

28 compensatory damages—against Defendant TASC.

51

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 52 of 57

1

Count Two: Wealth-Based Discrimination in Violation of the

2

Fourteenth Amendment

3 Brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 by Named Plaintiffs McKenna Stephens and Lucia

Soria on behalf of themselves and all others similarly situated against all Defendants

4

for injunctive relief; and by Plaintiff Taja Collier on her own behalf against

5

Defendant TASC for injunctive relief.

6

491. Defendants, acting in concert under color of state law, enacted, enforced,

7 and continue to enforce a policy, practice, and custom of subjecting participants to

8 longer terms of diversion and/or terminating them from the diversion program based on

9 wealth status.

10

492. Defendants subject diversion participants to longer terms of diversion

11 supervision while under threat of felony prosecution, which include in-person

12 reporting, drug and alcohol testing requirements, and increased payments, solely

13 because of their inability to pay fees associated with the program.

14

493. Pursuant to a written policy, Defendants terminate participants who

15 cannot afford to make specific minimum monthly payments toward diversion program

16 fees and subsequently prosecute them for felony possession of marijuana.

17

494. These policies, practices, and customs violate the Due Process and Equal

18 Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

19

495. As a direct and proximate cause of Defendants’ unlawful policies,

20 practices, and customs, Plaintiffs will continue to suffer violations of their

21 constitutional rights unless Defendants are enjoined.

22

496. Plaintiffs Stephens and Soria are participants in Defendants’ diversion

23 program and cannot afford to pay the fees required to complete the program in 90 days.

24

497. Plaintiffs Stephens and Soria seek to enjoin Defendants from requiring

25 them, and all others similarly situated, to remain on diversion for more than 90 days

26 solely because they cannot afford to pay the fees necessary to complete the diversion

27 program.

28 52

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 53 of 57

1

498. Plaintiffs Stephens and Soria also cannot afford to pay the minimum

2 monthly fees set by Defendant TASC.

3

499. Plaintiffs Stephens and Soria seek to enjoin Defendants from terminating

4 them, and all others similarly situated, from the diversion program solely because they

5 cannot afford to pay minimum monthly fees.

6

500. Plaintiff Collier is a participant in Defendants’ diversion program and

7 cannot afford to pay the fees required to complete the program.

8

501. Plaintiff Collier seeks to enjoin Defendant TASC from forcing her to

9 remain on diversion solely because she cannot afford to pay the fees necessary to

10 complete the diversion program.

11

502. Plaintiff Collier also cannot afford to pay the minimum monthly fees set

12 by Defendant TASC.

13

503. Plaintiff Collier seeks to enjoin Defendant TASC from terminating her

14 from the diversion program solely because she cannot afford to pay monthly minimum

15 fees.

16

Count Three: Wealth-Based Discrimination in Violation of the

17

Fourteenth Amendment

18 Brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 by Plaintiff Taja Collier on her own behalf against all Defendants for damages and against Defendant TASC for injunctive relief.
19

20

504. Defendants, acting in concert under color of state law, enacted, enforced,

21 and continue to enforce a policy, practice, and custom of not allowing participants in

22 Defendants’ diversion program to complete drug and alcohol tests unless those

23 participants can pay for them at the time of the test.

24

505. Defendants, acting in concert under color of state law, also enacted,

25 enforced, and continue to enforce a policy, practice, and custom of failing participants

26 from the program because those participants were not permitted to take drug and

27 alcohol tests solely because they were unable to afford them.

28 53

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 54 of 57

1

506. These policies, practices, and customs penalized Plaintiff Collier based

2 solely on her wealth status in violation of the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses

3 of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

4

507. As a direct and proximate cause of Defendants’ unlawful policies,

5 practices, and customs, Plaintiff Collier suffered violations of her constitutional rights

6 and thus is entitled to compensatory damages for her injuries.

7

508. Defendant TASC’s actions were willful, deliberate, and malicious, and

8 involved reckless or callous indifference to Plaintiff Collier’s constitutional rights.

9 Accordingly, she is entitled to recover punitive damages—in addition to compensatory

10 damages—against Defendant TASC.

11

509. Plaintiff Collier is still a participant in Defendants’ diversion program and

12 cannot afford to pay the program’s fees or the fees required to take drug and alcohol

13 tests.

14

510. Plaintiff Collier therefore seeks to enjoin Defendant TASC from refusing

15 to allow her to take drug and alcohol tests solely because she is unable to pay for them.

16

511. Plaintiff Collier also seeks to enjoin Defendant TASC from terminating

17 her from the diversion program because she did not take drug and alcohol tests solely

18 because she could not afford them.

19 Count Four: Unreasonable Searches and Seizures in Violation of the Fourth and

20

Fourteenth Amendments

21 Brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 by Named Plaintiffs DeShawn Briggs, Mark Pascale,

and Lucia Soria on behalf of themselves and all others similarly situated against all

22

Defendants for damages.

23

512. Defendants, acting in concert under color of state law, enacted, enforced,

24 and continue to enforce a policy, practice, and custom of requiring urinalysis to test for

25 drug and alcohol consumption for individuals who remain on the marijuana diversion

26 program solely because they were unable to pay the required fees.

27

28 54

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 55 of 57

1

513. This policy, practice, and custom violates the right to be free from

2 unreasonable searches and seizures under the Fourth Amendment to the U.S.

3 Constitution.

4

514. As a direct and proximate cause of Defendants’ unlawful policy, practice,

5 and custom, Plaintiffs have suffered violations of their bodily liberty and integrity and

6 are entitled to compensatory damages for their injuries.

7

515. Defendant TASC’s actions were knowing, willful, deliberate, and

8 malicious, and involved reckless or callous indifference to Plaintiffs’ constitutional

9 rights. Accordingly, Plaintiffs are entitled to recover punitive damages—in addition to

10 compensatory damages—against Defendant TASC.

11 Count Five: Unreasonable Searches and Seizures in Violation of the Fourth and

12

Fourteenth Amendments

13 Brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 by Named Plaintiffs McKenna Stephens and Lucia

Soria on behalf of themselves and all others similarly situated against all Defendants

14

for injunctive relief; and by Plaintiff Taja Collier on her own behalf against

15

Defendant TASC for injunctive relief.

16

516. Defendants, acting in concert under color of state law, enacted, enforced,

17 and continue to enforce a policy, practice, and custom of requiring urinalysis to test for

18 drug and alcohol consumption for individuals who remain on the marijuana diversion

19 program solely because they were unable to pay the required fees.

20

517. This policy, practice, and custom violates the right to be free from

21 unreasonable searches and seizures under the Fourth Amendment to the U.S.

22 Constitution.

23

518. As a direct and proximate cause of Defendants’ unlawful policy, practice,

24 and custom, Plaintiffs will suffer violations of their bodily liberty and integrity unless

25 Defendants are enjoined.

26

519. Plaintiffs Stephens and Soria are currently participants in Defendants’

27 diversion program and cannot afford to pay the fees required to complete the program

28 in 90 days. 55

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 56 of 57

1

520. Plaintiffs Stephens and Soria seek to enjoin Defendants from requiring

2 them, and all others similarly situated, to submit to drug and alcohol testing after 90

3 days in the program if the sole reason they remain on the program is that they cannot

4 afford to pay the fees necessary to complete it.

5

521. Plaintiff Collier is still a participant in Defendants’ diversion program and

6 cannot afford to pay the fees required to complete the diversion program.

7

522. Plaintiff Collier therefore requests that this Court enjoin Defendant TASC

8 from requiring her to take drug and alcohol tests solely because she cannot afford to

9 pay the fees necessary to complete the diversion program.

10

REQUEST FOR RELIEF

11

WHEREFORE, the Plaintiffs demand a jury trial for all issues so appropriate

12 and request this Court to issue the following relief:

13

A. That this action be certified as a class action pursuant to Rule 23 of the

14 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, declaring Named Plaintiffs DeShawn Briggs, Mark

15 Pascale, McKenna Stephens, and Lucia Soria as representatives of their respective

16 Classes and Named Plaintiffs’ counsel as counsel for the Classes;

17

B. A judgment compensating the Plaintiffs and the Classes of similarly

18 situated individuals for the damages that they suffered as a result of the Defendants’

19 unconstitutional and unlawful conduct in an amount to be determined at trial;

20

C. A judgment granting the punitive damages authorized by statute based

21 on Defendant TASC’s willful and egregious violations of the law;

22

D. A judgment enjoining Defendants from further unconstitutional and

23 unlawful conduct against Named Plaintiffs McKenna Stephens and Lucia Soria and

24 the class they represent;

25

E. A judgment enjoining Defendant TASC from further unconstitutional

26 conduct against Plaintiff Taja Collier;

27

28 56

Case 2:18-cv-02684-EJM Document 110 Filed 09/23/19 Page 57 of 57

1

F. An order and judgment granting reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs

2 pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1988 and 18 U.S.C. § 1964; and

3

G. Such other and further relief as the Court deems just and proper.

4 DATED this 26th day of August, 2019.

5

Respectfully submitted,

6

OSBORN MALEDON, P.A. 7

Timothy J. Eckstein

8

Joshua D. Bendor

2929 N. Central Ave., Suite 2100

9

Phoenix, Arizona 85012-2793

10

CIVIL RIGHTS CORPS 11

/s/ A. Dami Animashaun

12

A. Dami Animashaun

Katherine Chamblee-Ryan

13

Olevia Boykin

910 17th Street NW, Second Floor

14

Washington, D.C. 20006

15

Attorneys for Plaintiffs

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28 57

