Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 1 of 39

1 Timothy J. Eckstein, 018321 Joshua D. Bendor, 031908
2 OSBORN MALEDON, P.A. 2929 N. Central Ave., Suite 2100
3 Phoenix, Arizona 85012-2793 (602) 640-9000
4 teckstein@omlaw.com jbendor@omlaw.com
5
A. Dami Animashaun (pro hac vice application to be filed) 6 Katherine Chamblee-Ryan (pro hac vice application to be filed)
CIVIL RIGHTS CORPS 7 910 17th Street NW, Second Floor
Washington, D.C. 20002 8 (202) 656-5189
dami@civilrightscorps.org 9 katie@civilrightscorps.org

10 Attorneys for Plaintiffs

11

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

12

FOR THE DISTRICT OF ARIZONA

13 Deshawn Briggs and Mark Pascale, on

14

behalf of themselves and all others similarly situated; Taja Collier,

No. ________________

15 16 v.

Plaintiffs,

CLASS ACTION COMPLAINT AND JURY TRIAL DEMAND

17

William Montgomery, in his official capacity as County Attorney of

18

Maricopa County; Maricopa County; Treatment Assessment Screening

19 Center, Inc.,

20

Defendants.

21

OVERVIEW

22

1. The Maricopa County Attorney’s Office (MCAO) and the Treatment

23 Assessment Screening Center (TASC) jointly operate a possession of marijuana

24 diversion program1 that penalizes the poor because of their poverty.

25

26

27 1 This diversion program is referred to in the Complaint as “the possession of

28

marijuana diversion program,” “the marijuana diversion program,” and “the program.”

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 2 of 39

1

2. In a “diversion” program, participants undergo a period of supervision

2 and must meet certain requirements to avoid criminal prosecution and conviction.

3

3. The programs are generally “a functional equivalent of a sentence to

4 pretrial probation . . . and [are] staffed with paraprofessionals overseeing individuals in

5 what [is] in effect a probationary-type of supervision and control.”2

6

4. In principle, the programs are “intended to relieve overburdened courts

7 and crowded jails, and to spare low-risk offenders from the devastating consequences

8 of a criminal record.”3

9

5. But in Maricopa County, they serve another purpose: to make money for

10 those who operate the program, including the MCAO.4

11

6. Between 2006 and 2016, MCAO collected nearly $15 million in revenue

12 by diverting threatened prosecutions to TASC.5

13

7. The length of time a person spends in the diversion program and whether

14 the person ultimately completes the program and avoids felony criminal prosecution

15 depends on whether she can pay the program’s required fees.

16

17 2 S. Rep. No. 93–1021, at 36–37 (1974) (describing the operation of two pretrial diversion programs).
18 3 Shalia Dewan & Andrew W. Lehren, No Money, No Mercy: After a Crime, the

Price of a Second Chance, N.Y. Times (Dec. 12, 2016), 19 https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/12/us/crime-criminal-justice-reform-

20 diversion.html. 4 See Megan Cassidy, If Prop. 205 Passes, Maricopa County Attorney’s Office Funds
21 From Marijuana Diversion Program Would Dry Up, Ariz. Republic (Oct. 26, 2016),

22 https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/phoenix/2016/10/26/prop-205-marijuanadiversion-tasc-dry-up-county-attorney-bill-montgomery-millions/92795924; Ray

23 Stern, If Prop 205 Passes, the Maricopa County Attorney’s Budget is Likely to Take a

Hit, Phoenix New Times (Oct. 31, 2016), 24 https://www.phoenixnewtimes.com/news/if-prop-205-passes-the-maricopa-county-

25 attorneys-budget-is-likely-to-take-a-hit-8782184; Ray Stern, Potential Marijuana Legalization in Arizona Threatens TASC Drug Treatment Firm’s Funding, Phoenix
26 New Times (Jan. 26, 2016), https://www.phoenixnewtimes.com/news/potential-

27

marijuana-legalization-in-arizona-threatens-tasc-drug-treatment-firms-funding7999610.

28 5 See Cassidy, supra note 4.

2

7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 3 of 39

1

8. In order to complete the program and avoid felony criminal prosecution,

2 participants in the marijuana diversion program must pay a fee of $950 or $1000.

3

9. Participants must also pay $15 or $17 for drug and alcohol tests up to

4 three times each week.

5

10. The program is two-tiered: people who meet program requirements—

6 completing a three-hour drug education seminar and routine drug and alcohol testing—

7 and are wealthy enough to pay the program fees complete the program in 90 days and

8 are no longer subject to felony criminal prosecution.

9

11. But participants who cannot pay the program fees are forced to stay in the

10 program for at least six months or until they can pay off the money owed to MCAO and

11 TASC, even if they have satisfied every program requirement other than payment.

12

12. During the “pay-only”6 period, participants are subject to all of the

13 diversion program’s requirements.

14

13. These requirements include reporting to a TASC location, as often as

15 three times per week, so that the participant’s urine can be collected and tested.

16

14. Participants who remain on diversion solely because of their inability to

17 pay program fees must also continue to pay $15 or $17 each time they are required to

18 submit to a drug and alcohol test.

19

15. The perverse result is that poor people are ultimately charged more

20 money—potentially hundreds of dollars more—than are similarly situated participants

21 who can afford to pay to finish the program in 90 days.

22

23

24 6 “Pay-only” refers to a period of criminal supervision during which the person is

25 supervised only because she has not paid all of her debt. This “extremely muscular form of debt collection,” which “masquerades as supervision,” is becoming

26 increasingly common. Human Rights Watch, Profiting from Probation: America’s

27

‘Offender Funded’ Probation Industry (Feb. 5, 2014), https://www.hrw.org/report/2014/02/05/profiting-probation/americas-offender-

28 funded-probation-industry.

3

7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 4 of 39

1

16. They also remain subject to felony criminal prosecution during the

2 additional time they are forced to remain in the diversion program.

3

17. In addition, participants are not allowed to complete certain program

4 requirements if they cannot afford to pay for them.

5

18. For example, if a participant cannot pay the $15 or $17 fee for a drug and

6 alcohol test, she is not allowed to take the required test at all.

7

19. Therefore, if a participant reports for a drug and alcohol test without the

8 required fee, she will be turned away and can be referred for felony prosecution for

9 failing to complete a mandatory drug and alcohol test.

10

20. In other words, an unpaid drug and alcohol test is a failed test.

11

21. If a participant misses too many drug and alcohol tests—even if she

12 missed them solely because she could not afford to pay for them—she will be failed out

13 of the diversion program and prosecuted for felony possession of marijuana.

14

22. MCAO and TASC enforce these policies even when they know that

15 diversion participants are poor or even homeless, and even when they know that

16 participants are sacrificing basic necessities to pay fees.

17

23. Diversion participants who alert TASC employees that they cannot afford

18 the required fees are told that they will be failed from the program if they do not pay

19 and to do whatever it takes to get the money.

20

24. For example, Plaintiff Marc Pascale is a 60-year-old man with

21 degenerative disc disease, which has left him physically unable to work.

22

25. TASC refused to waive his program and drug and alcohol testing fees

23 even after he repeatedly told them that he could not afford to pay the fees.

24

26. Mr. Pascale’s case manager repeatedly told him to borrow money to pay

25 the fees or else he would fail the program, lose the money he had already paid in

26 program and drug and alcohol testing fees, and be prosecuted for felony criminal

27 possession of marijuana.

28 4
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 5 of 39

1

27. Plaintiff Taja Collier emailed her case manager at TASC to tell her that

2 she was homeless and could not afford to pay for drug and alcohol testing.

3

28. Ms. Collier’s case manager responded that if she did not test, she would

4 be issued a notice of violation and her case would be sent back to court, where she

5 would be prosecuted for felony criminal possession of marijuana.

6

29. As a result, Ms. Collier sold her blood plasma to pay for drug and alcohol

7 tests.

8

30. Plaintiffs bring this civil rights action pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 to

9 redress violations of Named Plaintiffs’, class members’, and Plaintiff Collier’s rights

10 under the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution.

11

31. Named Plaintiffs Deshawn Briggs and Mark Pascale, as well as the class

12 members whose interests they represent, seek monetary damages against Defendants

13 for violation of these rights.

14

32. Plaintiff Taja Collier seeks monetary damages and injunctive relief on her

15 own behalf.

16

PARTIES

17

Plaintiffs

18

33. Plaintiff Deshawn Briggs is a 28-year-old African American man. He is

19 a resident of Maricopa County, Arizona. Mr. Briggs spent six months in Defendants’

20 marijuana diversion program solely because he was unable to pay the program fees

21 within 90 days. He represents himself and a class of similarly situated people subject to

22 Defendants’ unlawful policies, practices, and customs.

23

34. Plaintiff Marc Pascale is a 60-year-old white man. He is a resident of

24 Maricopa County, Arizona. Mr. Pascale spent more than seven months in Defendants’

25 marijuana diversion program solely because he was unable to pay the program fees in

26 90 days. He represents himself and a class of similarly situated people subject to

27 Defendants’ unlawful policies, practices, and customs.

28 5
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 6 of 39

1

35. Plaintiff Taja Collier is a 21-year-old African American woman. She is

2 a resident of Maricopa County, Arizona. Ms. Collier was willing to meet all diversion

3 requirements, but she could not afford to pay for drug and alcohol testing, particularly

4 during a month when she was homeless and sleeping in parks. After Ms. Collier could

5 not afford to pay for several drug and alcohol tests, she was failed out of the diversion

6 program and was prosecuted for felony possession of marijuana. Ms. Collier was

7 prosecuted for felony marijuana possession and was once again diverted into

8 Defendants’ program. Ms. Collier brings this suit on her own behalf.

9

Defendants

10

36. Defendant Bill Montgomery is the elected County Attorney for

11 Maricopa County, Arizona. Defendant Montgomery is the chief official responsible for

12 the enforcement and prosecution of felonies within Maricopa County. Defendant

13 Montgomery is also responsible for operating and administering the deferred

14 prosecution programs in Maricopa County. Defendant Montgomery is the final

15 policymaker for Maricopa County on matters relating to diversion programs, including

16 the marijuana diversion program at issue in this lawsuit. He is sued in his official

17 capacity.

18

37. Defendant Maricopa County, Arizona7 is a political subdivision formed

19 and designated as such pursuant to Title 11 of the Arizona Revised Statutes. Defendant

20 Maricopa County can sue and be sued in its own name. Maricopa County is liable for

21 the practices and policies of Defendants Montgomery and TASC. The County has and

22 continues to acquiesce in the administration of the TASC drug diversion program,

23 including the marijuana diversion program at issue in this lawsuit.

24

38. Defendant Treatment Assessment Screening Center (“TASC”) is a

25 private, non-profit, 501(c)(3) corporation headquartered in Phoenix, Arizona.

26
27 7 Defendant Montgomery, in his official capacity, acts on behalf of and is the final policymaker for Maricopa County with respect to the conduct described in this
28 lawsuit. If this is correct, naming Maricopa County as a defendant is redundant. 6
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 7 of 39

1 Defendant TASC has contracted and continues to contract with MCAO to operate,

2 administer, and supervise the marijuana diversion program at issue in this lawsuit.

3 Defendant TASC supervises all people whose prosecutions for simple possession of

4 marijuana have been diverted. Defendant TASC acts under the color of law in its

5 administration and supervision of the County’s marijuana diversion program.

6

JURISDICTION

7

39. This action arises under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and the Constitution of the

8 United States. This Court has subject matter jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331 and

9 1343.

10

40. Venue is proper under 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b). All Defendants’ official

11 places of business are located within this District. The events giving rise to the claims

12 occurred in this District.

13

STATEMENT OF FACTS

14 I. Defendants’ Unlawful Policies

15

Marijuana Possession Prosecutions in Maricopa County

16

41. In Arizona, possession of any amount of marijuana—even trace

17 amounts—can be prosecuted as a felony.8

18

42. Defendant County Attorney Bill Montgomery has aggressively opposed

19 legalization measures as well as efforts to reduce simple possession of marijuana to a

20 misdemeanor.

21

22

23

24 8 See Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 13-3405(B)(1) (providing that possession of “an amount

25 of marijuana not possessed for sale having a weight of less than two pounds is guilty of a class 6 felony”). Arizona is the only state in the nation where any amount of

26 marijuana, no matter how small, can draw a felony charge. See Jacon Sullum,

27

Explaining His Cannabis Conversion, John Boehner Cites a Marijuana Myth, Reason (Apr. 12, 2018), http://reason.com/blog/2018/04/12/explaining-his-cannabis-

28 conversion-john/print.

7

7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 8 of 39

1

43. In 2016, Defendant Montgomery successfully advocated against the

2 passage of Proposition 205, a ballot initiative that would have made recreational

3 marijuana use legal in Arizona.

4

44. Defendant Montgomery made numerous public statements and

5 participated in public debates attacking the initiative and advocating for its failure.

6

45. During a public debate on marijuana legalization, Defendant

7 Montgomery told a Vietnam veteran, who admitted to using medical marijuana for back

8 pain and occasional recreation use, “I have no respect for you. … [Y]ou’re an enemy.”

9

46. Defendant Montgomery has also worked to narrow Arizona’s medical

10 marijuana laws.

11

47. For example, when Defendant Montgomery learned that doctors were

12 able to stop a five-year-old’s seizures by using a marijuana extract, he threatened the

13 child’s parents with felony prosecution, arguing that extracts were not covered by the

14 state’s medical marijuana allowance.9

15

48. Drug possession charges represent an overwhelming proportion of the

16 charges filed by MCAO.

17

49. Possession of marijuana is the MCAO’s most commonly prosecuted

18 offense; it amounts to approximately 15 percent of total prosecutions.10

19

50. And more broadly, more than 45 percent of MCAO’s prosecutions are for

20 drug possession.11

21

22

23 9 Evan Wyloge, Court Rules Medical Marijuana Patients Can Use Extracts, Ariz.

Capitol Times (Mar. 22, 2014), https://azcapitoltimes.com/news/2014/03/22/az24 medical-marijuana-patients-can-use-cannabis-extract-court-rules-bill-montgomery.

25 10 See Maricopa County Attorney’s Office, 2016 Annual Report, at 43, available at https://www.maricopacountyattorney.org/ArchiveCenter/View-File/Item/88.

26 The year 2016 is the most recent for which MCAO has published this charging

27

data. 11 Id. (calculated by adding the percentage of the total offenses charged represented

28 by each type of drug charge listed).

8

7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 9 of 39

1

51. Between 2006 and 2016, MCAO made nearly $15 million from diverting

2 threatened prosecutions to TASC.12

3

The Possession of Marijuana Diversion Program

4

52. For most people who are arrested in Maricopa County for simple

5 possession of marijuana, the only way to avoid a felony criminal prosecution is to

6 complete the diversion program offered by MCAO.

7

53. To operate, administer, and supervise participants in the program, MCAO

8 has contracted with TASC, a private non-profit company.

9

54. More than 15,000 people participated in MCAO and TASC’s marijuana

10 diversion program between 2011 and 2017.13

11

55. Over that same time period, the marijuana diversion program accounted

12 for approximately three quarters of TASC’s total intakes for drug diversion.14

13

56. People arrested for simple possession of marijuana or marijuana

14 paraphernalia can enter the diversion program either before or after criminal charges

15 are filed.

16

57. People who enter into the marijuana diversion program post-filing have

17 charges filed against them prior to enrolling in the program.

18

58. The charges are suspended while the person completes the program.

19

59. If the person successfully completes the program, MCAO dismisses the

20 case.

21

22

23 12 Cassidy, supra note 4. 13 See id. (providing the number of participants who enrolled in the program between
24 2011 and 2015); Letter from Bill Montgomery, County Attorney, Maricopa County,
25 to Elizabeth Ortiz, Executive Director, Arizona Prosecuting Attorneys’ Advisory Council (Aug. 8, 2017) (providing the number of participants who enrolled in the
26 program from July 1, 2016 through June 30, 2017). 27 14 See Cassidy, supra note 4; Letter from Bill Montgomery, County Attorney,
Maricopa County, to Elizabeth Ortiz, Executive Director, Arizona Prosecuting
28 Attorneys’ Advisory Council (Aug. 8, 2017). 9
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 10 of 39

1

60. If the person fails to complete the program, MCAO reinstates

2 prosecution.

3

61. People can also enter the program before any criminal charges are filed

4 in court.

5

62. People who enter the marijuana diversion program pre-filing are sent a

6 letter from MCAO.

7

63. The letter informs the person that she is facing class 6 felony charges and

8 offers two options: criminal prosecution or the TASC marijuana diversion program.

9

64. The letter warns, “If convicted of a class 6 felony, you could receive a

10 maximum sentence of 2 years in prison and a maximum fine of $150,000 plus 80%

11 surcharge.”

12

65. The letter also warns that a class 1 misdemeanor conviction could result

13 in “a maximum sentence of six months in jail and a maximum fine of $2,500.00 plus

14 80% surcharge.”

15

66. The threats in this letter are false.

16

67. Under Arizona law, jail or prison time is prohibited for a first or second

17 offense of simple possession of marijuana.

18

68. Instead, for people in this category, the law requires drug treatment and a

19 maximum penalty of probation. See Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 13-901.01(A), (D), (H)(1).

20

69. The pre-filing diversion program generally only includes people with no

21 prior convictions.

22

70. Accordingly, the vast majority of people who receive the pre-filing letter

23 threatening jail time are ineligible to be jailed as a matter of state law.

24

71. The letter’s representation that its recipients could be fined $150,000 plus

25 an 80% surcharge are false as well.15

26
27 15 A person convicted of possession of marijuana can be fined $750 or three times the value of the marijuana involved. See Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 13-3405(D). $150,000 is the
28 maximum fine allowable for any felony. See Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 13-801(a). No person 10
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 11 of 39

1

72. After delivering these false threats, the letter explains the basic

2 requirements of the marijuana diversion program and provides a deadline and contact

3 information to sign up for the program.

4

73. If a person in the pre-filing category completes the diversion program,

5 MCAO will not file charges against her.

6

74. Failing the program results in criminal prosecution.16

7

75. Participants who do not complete the diversion program and whose cases

8 are prosecuted have little hope of avoiding felony criminal prosecution and conviction

9 because people who enroll in the marijuana diversion program—whether pre- or post-

10 filing—are first required to sign a statement admitting their guilt.

11

76. A TASC employee tells participants exactly what to write in the statement

12 of facts.

13

77. The following information must be written into the statement:

14

a. Date and location of the offense;

15

b. The full name of the substance possessed;

16

c. That the participant possessed a usable amount of the substance; and

17

d. The facts of the offense, which must read, “the [name of the drug] was

18

found in [where the drug was found] in my possession.”

19

78. This signed statement of facts can be used against a person if she fails to

20 complete the marijuana diversion program and is criminally prosecuted. See State v.

21 Gill, 391 P.3d 1193, 1197 (Ariz. 2017) (holding that a written admission contained in

22 a statement of facts obtained by a TASC representative was admissible at trial).

23

24 accused of a crime involving $150,000 worth of marijuana would be eligible for

25 TASC. 16 When a person in the pre-filing group fails diversion, the prosecutor will file

26 charges in the case. When a person in the post-filing group fails diversion, the

27

prosecutor will move to reinstate the prosecution. As a matter of policy, practice, and custom, for both pre- and post-filing participants, TASC sends the participant a final

28 warning letter before the participant is failed from the program.

11

7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 12 of 39

1

The Cost of Avoiding Prosecution

2

79. Once enrolled in the marijuana diversion program, the requirements for

3 the pre- and post-filing participants are the same.

4

80. For both groups of participants, avoiding prosecution costs money.

5

81. To complete the program, all participants must:

6

a. Pay program fees—$950 or $1000—in full;

7

b. Pay for and pass routine drug and alcohol tests for 90 days; and

8

c. Complete a three-hour drug education seminar.

9

82. The mandatory $950 or $1000 program fee includes:

10

a. A $150 admission fee;

11

b. A $650 “drug fund” fee;

12

c. A $150 TASC fee; and

13

d. A $50 booking fee, which applies only to participants who were

14

arrested and booked.

15

83. All of these fees must be paid in person by debit card or with a money

16 order.

17

84. Participants are not allowed to pay by any other means, including with

18 credit or cash.

19

85. Defendants require that participants pay the $150 admission fee at the

20 program orientation.

21

86. If a participant is unable to pay the $150 admission fee at orientation

22 because she cannot afford it, Defendants allow her to pay $75 at orientation and the

23 other $75 during the program.

24

87. If a participant is allowed to attend orientation without making a payment

25 up front, she may be told to return with the money the same day or be failed from the

26 program and face felony prosecution.

27

28 12
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 13 of 39

1

88. In addition to the $950 or $1000 in fees, participants must pay to take

2 drug and alcohol tests at TASC.

3

89. Each drug and alcohol test costs $15 or $17, depending on the method of

4 payment.

5

90. Participants are called to drug test at least once—and often multiple

6 times—each week.

7

91. Records obtained as part of the preliminary investigation for this lawsuit

8 revealed that participants may be required to test as many as nine times per month.

9

92. Thus, on top of the $1000 in program fees, diversion participants pay at

10 least $60—but up to $153—each month for drug and alcohol tests.

11

93. Participants who complete the three program requirements—including

12 full payment of fees—within 90 days are deemed to have successfully completed the

13 program and are no longer subject to felony criminal prosecution.

14

94. However, as a matter of policy, practice, and custom, people who cannot

15 afford to pay the program fees in full within 90 days are not released from the

16 program—even if they meet program requirements and have never tested positive for

17 marijuana (or any other drug, including alcohol).

18

95. Instead, participants who cannot afford to pay these fees must remain in

19 the supervision program for a minimum of six months.

20

96. If these participants are not able to pay the program fees by the end of six

21 months, they must remain in the program until they do.

22

97. Defendants do not assess a person’s ability to pay before refusing to

23 consider her for program completion after 90 days solely because she has not finished

24 paying the required fees.

25

98. Nor do Defendants assess a person’s ability to pay before they require her

26 to remain on diversion until all fees are paid.

27

28 13
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 14 of 39

1

99. People who are forced to stay on diversion solely because they cannot

2 afford to pay program fees must continue to submit to one or more drug and alcohol

3 tests weekly—under the threat of criminal prosecution.

4

100. The stalls in which participants submit urine for drug alcohol testing

5 frequently include glass panels so that a TASC employee can watch participants while

6 they urinate.

7

101. In at least one TASC location, the bathroom where participants submit

8 urine for testing includes multiple mirrors so that a TASC employee can watch the

9 participant urinate from multiple angles.

10

102. Participants who remain on diversion solely because they could not pay

11 to complete the program must also complete all of the requirements attendant to the

12 drug and alcohol tests.

13

103. For example, these participants must call TASC every day—or consult a

14 phone application—seven days a week, to determine whether they are required to report

15 to a TASC location during a certain time period that day so that TASC can collect and

16 test their urine.

17

104. If a participant does not call daily, this can be counted as a missed drug

18 and alcohol test and she can be sanctioned, which could potentially result in felony

19 prosecution.

20

105. Participants are also not permitted to drink “excessive amounts of fluids,”

21 since doing so can dilute a urine sample.

22

106. People who remain on diversion because they cannot afford to pay

23 program fees are also still forced to pay $15 or $17 for each drug and alcohol test.

24

107. As a result, these participants may ultimately have to pay hundreds of

25 dollars more than people wealthy enough to pay the $950 or $1000 program fee within

26 90 days—in addition to remaining subject to felony criminal prosecution for months

27 longer.

28 14
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 15 of 39

1

Defendants’ Refusal to Waive Fees for the Poor

2

108. As a matter of policy, practice, and custom, Defendants do not reduce or

3 waive the $950 or $1000 program fee for any person, regardless of financial

4 circumstances.

5

109. Defendants contend that they allow for reductions of drug and alcohol

6 testing fees to $7 instead of $15 per test for participants who cannot afford them—but

7 these reductions are almost never granted in practice.

8

110. At the outset, Defendants do not assess participants’ ability to pay before

9 charging them in full for tests.

10

111. But even when Defendants are aware that a participant is indigent and

11 unable to pay without sacrificing basic necessities, Defendants require the participant

12 to pay the full $15 or $17 to test.

13

112. One TASC employee interviewed by investigators for undersigned

14 counsel stated that reduced drug and alcohol testing fees are reserved for people who

15 can demonstrate that they have basically zero income.

16

113. Another TASC employee explained that fee reductions are “very

17 difficult” to get and that “it rarely happens.”

18

114. As one TASC employee explained, drug and alcohol testing is “strictly

19 fee for service.”

20

115. When participants tell TASC case managers that they are struggling to

21 pay, the case managers recommend they borrow money from friends or family because

22 they will be failed from the program and prosecuted if they do not pay.

23

Defendants Do Not Allow Participants to Take Drug and Alcohol Tests

24

Unless They Pay for Them

25

116. As a matter of policy, practice, and custom, Defendants do not allow

26 diversion participants to take the program’s mandatory drug and alcohol tests unless

27 they can pay for them at the time of the test.

28 15
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 16 of 39

1

117. As a result, poor people are forced to extend their time on the program

2 for failing to take mandatory drug and alcohol tests—solely because they could not

3 afford to pay for them.

4

118. People who cannot afford to take drug and alcohol tests may also fail the

5 program altogether.

6

119. Missed drug and alcohol tests are counted as “violations”—even when a

7 person only missed the test because she could not afford to pay for it.

8

120. A person who accrues too many of these violations will be failed by

9 TASC and referred to the MCAO for prosecution.

10

121. When this happens, a person faces felony prosecution solely because of

11 her inability to pay.

12

122. No one at TASC assesses a person’s ability to pay before referring her for

13 prosecution because she did not pay for drug and alcohol tests.

14

123. Nor does anyone at MCAO assess ability to pay before prosecuting

15 people who have failed diversion solely because of their inability to pay for drug and

16 alcohol tests.

17

The “User-Funded” Model

18

124. Defendants MCAO and TASC advertise the diversion program as “user-

19 funded.”

20

125. According to MCAO, “user-funded” means that “the [person entering the

21 program] typically bears the costs of the initial assessment and the assigned treatment.”

22

126. A brochure published by MCAO describing its felony pretrial diversion

23 programs notes that “defendants … bear the costs of the program.”17

24

127. Defendant TASC’s website explains that the diversion program “is fully

25 funded by the clients we serve.”18

26

27

17 Maricopa County Attorney’s Office, Felony Pretrial Intervention Program (2018). 18 Diversion, TASC, http://www.tascsolutions.org/tasc-services/diversion (last visited

28 Aug. 22, 2018).

16

7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 17 of 39

1

128. Defendant TASC is responsible for collecting fees from the people

2 enrolled in the diversion program.

3

129. Defendant TASC keeps a portion of the money it collects.

4

130. The $650 “drug fund fee” that Defendant TASC collects from each

5 participant is deposited to MCAO.

6

131. MCAO does not publicly disclose how it spends the money it receives

7 from the program.

8

132. In addition to collecting fees, the Contract between Defendants MCAO

9 and TASC makes Defendant TASC responsible for most of the day-to-day operations

10 of the possession of marijuana diversion program.

11

133. This includes administering drug and alcohol tests, tracking participants’

12 attendance and participation, and determining whether a participant has completed the

13 program requirements.

14

134. MCAO’s duties under the Contract are to assess the appropriateness of

15 referrals to the program and to send qualified participants to Defendant TASC.

16

135. The Contract does not require the MCAO to pay Defendant TASC any

17 money.

18

136. Instead, the Contract provides that the program’s participants alone will

19 pay Defendant TASC, and “no public monies will be expended pursuant to [the

20 Contract].”19

21

137. The Contract does provide that, “[a]t his option, the County Attorney may

22 utilize monies accumulated in the Drug Diversion Fund to satisfy the costs associated

23 with this agreement if the participant is indigent and unable to pay the costs associated

24 with the … diversion program.”20

25

26
27 19 MCAO & TASC, Behavior Specific Adult Diversion Program Contract, at 1 (Mar. 22, 2016, effective through Sept. 30, 2018).
28 20 Id. 17
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 18 of 39

1

138. But there is no requirement that MCAO make such payments. 21

2

139. Between 2006 and 2016, MCAO made nearly $15 million in fees from

3 participants in the marijuana diversion program.22

4

140. Defendant TASC has also benefited financially from operating the

5 marijuana diversion program.

6

141. Defendant TASC’s net assets were approximately $18 million in 2016.23

7

142. In 2014, TASC paid its CEO $281,165 and its former CEO $963,358.24

8

143. In 2015, TASC paid its CEO $321,347.25

9

144. In 2016, TASC paid its CEO $308,720.26

10

Plaintiffs

11

Class Representatives Deshawn Briggs and Mark Pascale

12

145. Class representatives Deshawn Briggs and Mark Pascale were both

13 required to remain in the pretrial diversion program for more than double the time

14 required of similarly situated (but wealthier) participants solely because they were

15 unable to pay program fees.

16

146. Plaintiff Deshawn Briggs was arrested for simple possession of marijuana

17 in December 2015.

18

147. Mr. Briggs had no prior criminal record

19

148. He was not addicted to marijuana.

20

149. On or around January 13, 2016, Mr. Briggs received a letter from MCAO.

21

150. The letter stated that he had two options with respect to his marijuana

22 arrest: he could face prosecution and conviction with a punishment of two years in jail

23

24 21 The Contract states, “[U]nder no circumstances is the County liable for any fees or

25 costs related to [the] Contract.” Id. 22 Cassidy, supra note 4.

26 23 See IRS Form 990, filed by TASC for 2016, at 1.

27

24 See IRS Form 990, filed by TASC for 2014, at 7. 25 See IRS Form 990, filed by TASC for 2015, at 7.

28 26 See IRS Form 990, filed by TASC for 2016, at 7.

18

7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 19 of 39

1 and a fine of up to $150,000 plus an 80% surcharge—or he could participate in the

2 TASC pretrial diversion program.

3

151. The claims in the letter Mr. Briggs received were false.

4

152. Because this was Mr. Briggs’ first offense, under Arizona law, he could

5 not receive jail or prison time if convicted of simple possession of marijuana.

6

153. Mr. Briggs also did not face a $150,000 fine.

7

154. Mr. Briggs did not know that he could not receive jail time for conviction

8 of marijuana possession since it was his first offense.

9

155. He also did not know that he could not be fined $150,000.

10

156. Mr. Briggs chose to participate in the pretrial diversion program because

11 he did not want to go to jail and thought the diversion program was the only way to

12 avoid two years of incarceration and a six-figure fine.

13

157. Mr. Briggs followed the instructions given in the letter and contacted

14 TASC to enroll in the program.

15

158. A TASC employee told Mr. Briggs to appear for orientation and bring a

16 $150 intake fee.

17

159. At the orientation, a TASC employee informed Mr. Briggs of the program

18 requirements and fees.

19

160. The TASC employee told Mr. Briggs that he would have to submit to and

20 pass random drug and alcohol tests for 90 days, complete a three-hour drug education

21 class, and pay his program fees of $1000 in full within that 90-day period.

22

161. The TASC employee told Mr. Briggs that the program would either last

23 for 90 days or six months.

24

162. The employee told him that if he tested clean, attended the class, and paid

25 his program fees in full, then he would complete the program in 90 days.

26

27

28 19
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 20 of 39

1

163. If he did not complete any of the three requirements in the first 90 days,

2 including payment of fees in full, he would have to stay in the program for an additional

3 three months or be prosecuted for a felony.

4

164. The TASC Employee did not ask Mr. Briggs whether he would be able

5 to pay the program and drug and alcohol testing fees.

6

165. Mr. Briggs was told to sign a “statement of facts” as a condition of entry

7 into the program.

8

166. The statement of facts stated that Mr. Briggs possessed a usable quantity

9 of marijuana.

10

167. Mr. Briggs did not consult with an attorney before signing the statement

11 because he could not afford one.

12

168. Because of this, Mr. Briggs believed that if he failed to meet the

13 program’s requirements—including paying the necessary fees—he would go to jail.

14

169. Mr. Briggs passed all of his drug tests during the first 90 days of the

15 program.

16

170. During that time period, Mr. Briggs was required to report for drug and

17 alcohol testing up to three times each week.

18

171. Mr. Briggs was forced to pay each time he reported for a drug and alcohol

19 test, even though he was struggling to pay for basic necessities.

20

172. Mr. Briggs also completed the required three-hour drug education

21 seminar during his first 90 days on the program.

22

173. However, in that first 90 days, Mr. Briggs could not afford to pay the

23 $1000 fee.

24

174. At the time, Mr. Briggs worked part time at a Walmart, where he made

25 $10 an hour.

26

175. His monthly pay was less than $1000.

27

28 20
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 21 of 39

1

176. Mr. Briggs also has disabilities caused by spinal meningitis that limit his

2 ability to work.

3

177. During the first 90 days of the program, Mr. Briggs was only able to pay

4 $421 toward the $1000 balance.

5

178. Mr. Briggs made those payments in small installments.

6

179. He paid one $75 installment toward his $150 orientation fee on February

7 29, 2016.

8

180. He paid the second installment on April 14, 2016.

9

181. On that same date, Mr. Briggs paid another $95 toward his balance.

10

182. On May 5, 2016, Mr. Briggs paid $170 toward his balance.

11

183. On May 11, 2016, he paid another $16.

12

184. During that same time period, Mr. Briggs paid approximately $195 for

13 drug and alcohol tests.

14

185. Despite meeting all other program requirements, Mr. Briggs was not

15 considered for program completion because he had not paid the $1000 fee in full.

16

186. Instead, Mr. Briggs was required to remain on diversion, and remained

17 subject to felony criminal prosecution.

18

187. Mr. Briggs was also required to report to drug and alcohol testing once to

19 three times each week.

20

188. After the first 90 days on the program, Mr. Briggs reported for and passed

21 15 drug and alcohol tests.

22

189. These additional drug and alcohol tests cost Mr. Briggs approximately

23 $225.

24

190. Mr. Briggs also continued to make payments against his balance.

25

191. On June 16, 2016, Mr. Briggs paid $170.

26

192. On July 14, 2016, he paid $70.

27

193. On August 18, 2016, he paid $50.

28 21
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 22 of 39

1

194. Finally, on August 25, 2016, Mr. Briggs paid a final installment of $275.

2

195. When Mr. Briggs made this final payment, a TASC employee told

3 Mr. Briggs that had successfully completed the program and that he should return to

4 the TASC office the next day to receive his certificate of completion.

5

196. Mr. Briggs returned to the TASC offices the following day and received

6 a certification of completion from TASC.

7

197. Plaintiff Mark Pascale is a 60-year-old man.

8

198. Mr. Pascale lives in Maricopa County, Arizona with his 15-year-old son,

9 for whom he is the sole provider.

10

199. Mr. Pascale is disabled; he suffers from degenerative disc disease in his

11 neck and back.

12

200. To manage his symptoms, Mr. Pascale takes an anti-epileptic drug, an

13 anti-convulsant drug, and morphine every day.

14

201. Because of his illness, Mr. Pascale has been physically unable to work

15 since 2008.

16

202. That year, Mr. Pascale filed for bankruptcy.

17

203. Mr. Pascale’s only stable source of income comes from federal disability

18 benefits.

19

204. Mr. Pascale also receives nutritional assistance benefits and, in the past,

20 has received assistance from government programs to pay his utility bills.

21

205. In May 2017, a police officer found a small amount of marijuana in

22 Mr. Pascale’s car.

23

206. Mr. Pascale was not arrested, but he received a criminal summons in the

24 mail in October 2017, stating that he was being charged with possession or use of

25 marijuana, a class 6 felony.

26

207. At his first court appearance, Mr. Pascale agreed to enroll in the

27 marijuana diversion program.

28 22
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 23 of 39

1

208. Mr. Pascale was not addicted to marijuana.

2

209. Mr. Pascale attended an orientation for the program on November 21,

3 2017.

4

210. Mr. Pascale could not afford to pay the $150 application fee that TASC

5 requires at orientation.

6

211. A TASC employee agreed to allow Mr. Pascale to pay $75 up front

7 instead of $150 to attend the orientation.

8

212. The remaining $75 was added to Mr. Pascale’s bill, and he was required

9 to pay it before he could complete the diversion program.

10

213. During the orientation, a TASC employee told Mr. Pascale that he could

11 complete the program in 90 days if he did not fail any drug and alcohol tests and paid

12 all required fees in full.

13

214. When Mr. Pascale reported for his first mandatory drug and alcohol test,

14 he told his case worker at TASC that he could not afford to pay the $950 in program

15 fees.27

16

215. He also told her that he could not afford to pay $15 or $17 for drug and

17 alcohol testing weekly or multiple times each week.

18

216. Mr. Pascale’s case worker told him that there was no way to waive or

19 reduce the program fees.

20

217. However, she explained, his drug and alcohol testing fees could

21 potentially be reduced to $7 per test instead of $15 per test.

22

218. The case worker gave Mr. Pascale a financial information form to

23 complete.

24

219. On the form, Mr. Pascale marked that he was disabled and worked zero

25 hours per week.

26

27

28 27 Because Mr. Pascale was not arrested, he did not have to pay the $50 booking fee. 23
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 24 of 39

1

220. He listed his income as $920 per month, explaining that he received

2 disability benefits.

3

221. The case worker told Mr. Pascale that he did not qualify for reduced drug

4 and alcohol testing fees because he owned a computer and was paying for internet

5 service, which are “luxuries.”

6

222. Mr. Pascale therefore had to pay the full $15 for each required drug and

7 alcohol test.

8

223. These payments, made out of his disability income, made it difficult for

9 Mr. Pascale to pay for basic necessities for himself and his son, including food, shelter,

10 medication, and clothing.

11

224. r. Pascale was tested at least once per week, but as often as three times

12 per week.

13

225. At least once each month, Mr. Pascale would be asked to submit to

14 additional drug and alcohol testing because he had tested positive for opiates due to the

15 prescription medications he takes.

16

226. Mr. Pascale had provided his case worker with information and

17 documentation about the prescription medications that he takes (including morphine),

18 but even so, she ordered the extra testing.

19

227. Mr. Pascale had to pay for these additional tests as well.

20

228. Mr. Pascale frequently emphasized to his case worker that he did not have

21 the money to pay for drug and alcohol tests.

22

229. The case worker told Mr. Pascale that he had to pay in order to be tested

23 and suggested he borrow money.

24

230. Mr. Pascale often skipped paying bills to keep up with the fees.

25

231. After 90 days had passed, Mr. Pascale had met all non-monetary program

26 requirements and had never failed a drug and alcohol test.

27

232. He had not, however, finished paying the $950 he owed in program fees.

28 24
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 25 of 39

1

233. As a result, Mr. Pascale was required to remain on diversion until all of

2 the fees were paid.

3

234. During this time, he was still required to submit to and pay for drug and

4 alcohol testing up to three times each week.

5

235. Mr. Pascale made his final payment—and submitted to and passed his

6 final drug and alcohol test—on June 29, 2018, more than seven months after he had

7 entered the program.

8

236. When Mr. Pascale told his case worker that he had paid his program fees

9 in full, she told him that he had successfully completed the program and issued a

10 certificate of completion dated July 5, 2018.

11

Individual Plaintiff Taja Collier

12

237. Plaintiff Taja Collier is a 21-year-old African American woman.

13

238. On October 7, 2016, Ms. Collier was riding in a car with friends when the

14 car was pulled over by a police officer for making an improper turn.

15

239. The officer searched the car’s occupants and found a small cylinder in

16 Ms. Collier’s purse that contained trace amounts of marijuana.

17

240. The amount of marijuana in the container was so small that the police

18 officer did not weigh it.

19

241. Ms. Collier was placed under arrest for possession of marijuana.

20

242. Ms. Collier had no prior criminal record.

21

243. Ms. Collier was not addicted to marijuana.

22

244. In early Spring 2017, Ms. Collier received a letter from MCAO.

23

245. The letter gave her two choices: she could face felony charges for

24 marijuana possession, or she could agree to participate in the TASC diversion program.

25

246. The letter warned Ms. Collier that if convicted, she could be sentenced to

26 two years in jail and a fine of up to $150,000, plus an 80% surcharge.

27

247. These threats were false.

28 25
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 26 of 39

1

248. Because this was Ms. Collier’s first offense, under Arizona law, she could

2 not receive jail or prison time if convicted of simple possession of marijuana.

3

249. Nor was Ms. Collier eligible for a $150,000 fine.

4

250. But Ms. Collier believed the threats in the letter.

5

251. She decided to enroll in the TASC diversion program because she did not

6 want to be fined $150,000 or spend two years in prison.

7

252. At the time of her arrest, Mr. Collier was a sophomore at Central Arizona

8 College, where she studied social work.

9

253. Central Arizona College is located in Casa Grande, Arizona, which is

10 almost an hour away from Phoenix.

11

254. When Ms. Collier learned that the TASC diversion program required

12 drug and alcohol testing in Phoenix multiple times each week, she decided she could

13 not go back to college while she was on the TASC program.

14

255. Ms. Collier did not have a car or money to make such a long trip so

15 frequently.

16

256. She had to stop attending school and move to Phoenix in order to

17 participate in the diversion program.

18

257. Ms. Collier was told that she would need to pay $150 at the orientation in

19 order to start the program.

20

258. She planned to start the program on June 22, 2017.

21

259. That week, however, Ms. Collier realized she would not be able to come

22 up with the $150 required to start the program.

23

260. Ms. Collier had recently started a job working part-time at a Target.

24

261. Ms. Collier made around minimum wage and worked approximately 16

25 hours per week.

26

262. However, she had not yet received her first paycheck.

27

28 26
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 27 of 39

1

263. Ms. Collier called TASC’s main office to tell them that she could not

2 afford to pay the $150 fee.

3

264. No one called her back.

4

265. At 6:51 a.m. on the morning her orientation was set to begin, Ms. Collier

5 sent an email to the general email address for the possession of marijuana diversion

6 program.

7

266. The email read, “Hi, my name is Taja Collier. I called the office to

8 reschedule my appointment 2 days ago and have not received a call back. I left a

9 message for the corporate office and nod [sic] I'm sending this email. I had an

10 appointment today at 8:45 and I do not have 150 because I get my first check next week.

11 I do not want my file sent back to the court system.”

12

267. Later the same day, Ms. Collier reached a TASC employee by phone and

13 rescheduled her orientation for July 6, 2017.

14

268. Several days later, however, on June 25, 2017, Ms. Collier learned that

15 she would not be paid until after July 9, 2017.

16

269. Ms. Collier wrote again to the email address for the possession of

17 marijuana diversion program and informed TASC that she needed to reschedule the

18 orientation for after she got paid.

19

270. A TASC employee rescheduled Ms. Collier’s orientation for July 13,

20 2017.

21

271. The employee did not tell her that she could start the program even if she

22 did not pay.

23

272. The employee also did not tell her that she could apply for a fee waiver

24 or a fee reduction.

25

273. On July 13, 2017, Ms. Collier paid $150 to TASC and attended the

26 mandatory orientation.

27

28 27
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 28 of 39

1

274. Shortly after her orientation, Ms. Collier was informed by the case

2 manager that had been assigned to her that she had to submit to a drug and alcohol test

3 and that she had to pay for the test in order to take it.

4

275. Ms. Collier was willing to take the mandatory test, but she could not

5 afford the $15 or $17 fee to pay for it.

6

276. Ms. Collier again emailed the address for the possession of marijuana

7 diversion program.

8

277. In her email, Ms. Collier pleaded: “I won't be able to come up with the

9 fee money until next Friday. I keep calling [my case manager] to figure out what my

10 next steps should be. Is there anyway [sic] I can change case managers or get some

11 assistance?”

12

278. No one responded to the email.

13

279. Nor did anyone call Ms. Collier to follow up.

14

280. Ultimately, Ms. Collier could not take the test because she could not

15 afford to pay for it.

16

281. To pay for her drug tests going forward, Ms. Collier began to sell her own

17 blood plasma whenever she was called to test.

18

282. Whenever Ms. Collier would learn that she had a drug test, she would

19 schedule a blood plasma sale so that she could pay for the test.

20

283. Ms. Collier made $20 to $35 each time she sold her blood plasma.

21

284. However, according to the blood plasma center’s rules, a person is only

22 allowed to sell blood plasma twice each week.

23

285. Therefore, weeks when Ms. Collier was called to drug test more than

24 twice were especially difficult for her to manage.

25

286. After she sold her blood plasma, Ms. Collier often felt fatigued and dizzy,

26 like she couldn’t breathe or might black out.

27

28 28
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 29 of 39

1

287. But she continued to sell her blood plasma because it was the only way

2 she could pay for the drug tests.

3

288. Ms. Collier told her case manager at TASC that she sold her blood plasma

4 to pay for drug tests.

5

289. The case manager never told her that she could take the tests without

6 paying for them at the time of the test.

7

290. The case manager also never told her that she could apply for a reduced

8 fee.

9

291. At times, even after selling her blood plasma, Ms. Collier could not afford

10 to take drug and alcohol tests at TASC.

11

292. When this happened, Ms. Collier could not take required drug and alcohol

12 tests because she was not allowed to test if she could not pay for it.

13

293. Instead, Ms. Collier would try to contact her case manager to tell her that

14 she could not afford to pay to test.

15

294. Frequently, Ms. Collier’s case manager would not answer her phone or

16 respond to emails, and Ms. Collier would try to reach her by calling TASC’s corporate

17 office.

18

295. In September 2017, Ms. Collier became homeless.

19

296. She remained homeless for approximately one month.

20

297. While she was homeless, Ms. Collier slept in public parks.

21

298. On September 20, 2017, Ms. Collier emailed her case manager.

22

299. She explained, “I have been homeless for the passed [sic] week so money

23 has been really tight. … It has been really tough.”

24

300. Ms. Collier also told her case manager in the email that she planned to

25 start Job Corps and that she would be able to pay for drug and alcohol tests once she

26 started.

27

301. Ms. Collier’s case manager responded five days later.

28 29
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 30 of 39

1

302. In her email, the case manager replied:

2

“Sorry to hear that you are going through this. I am hoping

3

things get better for you. I also noticed that since you are

on your FINAL NOTICE, any missed test past this point

4

will result in program termination. So I am happy to hear

5

that you are going to do whatever is possible to test next

time you are required to test. Good Luck and hope

6

everything works out for you.”

7

303. Again, the case manager did not suggest that Ms. Collier could take the

8 tests without paying for them.

9

304. Nor did she invite her to apply for a reduced fee.

10

305. Shortly after this exchange, Ms. Collier was issued another violation

11 because she did not take drug and alcohol tests solely because she could not afford to

12 pay for them.

13

306. On October 10, 2017, TASC reported to MCAO that Ms. Collier had

14 failed the diversion program.

15

307. In its reasons for failing Ms. Collier, TASC listed that Ms. Collier had not

16 submitted to mandatory drug and alcohol tests.

17

308. As described above, Ms. Collier did not take these tests solely because

18 she could not afford to pay for them.

19

309. TASC also stated that Ms. Collier was being failed because she had not

20 paid the required TASC fee and had not paid the required drug fund assessment fee.28

21

22 28 In addition, TASC stated that Ms. Collier had not attended the program’s

23 mandatory seminar. However, participants are required to take this seminar before

they can successfully complete the program; they are not required to take it at a 24 specific time. Ms. Collier would not have been failed from the diversion program

25 solely because she had not yet completed the seminar. The only other reason TASC provided for failing Ms. Collier was that she did not respond to a non-compliance

26 letter she received on August 7, 2017. But Ms. Collier was in contact with her case

27

manager after receiving this letter and explained that she could not afford to pay for drug and alcohol tests. In addition, TASC does not have a policy, practice, or custom

28 of failing diversion participants who do not respond to a letter.

30

7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 31 of 39

1

310. On December 8, 2017, MCAO filed felony charges against Ms. Collier

2 for possession of marijuana.

3

311. Ms. Collier’s preliminary hearing was on January 22, 2018.

4

312. On that same date, Ms. Collier agreed to re-enroll in the TASC possession

5 of marijuana diversion program.

6

313. Ms. Collier’s prosecution was suspended for two years to allow her to

7 complete TASC.

8

314. Ms. Collier knew that she would struggle to pay for diversion.

9

315. But she decided to re-enroll because—based on the false threats in the

10 letter that she received from MCAO—she believed that she would go to jail if she did

11 not complete diversion.

12

316. To re-enter the program, Ms. Collier was again required to pay the $150

13 admissions fee.

14

317. Ms. Collier paid $148 toward that amount on March 13, 2018.

15

318. Ms. Collier paid the remaining $2 on May 24, 2018.

16

319. Since that time, Ms. Collier has made payments of between $8 and $20.

17

320. Ms. Collier still must pay $667 to TASC before she can complete the

18 program.

19

321. Ms. Collier is still required to submit to drug and alcohol testing—at $15

20 or $17 per test—one to three times each week.

21

322. TASC still will not allow Ms. Collier to complete drug and alcohol tests

22 unless she pays for them.

23

323. Ms. Collier therefore continues to sell her blood plasma whenever she

24 knows she is going to be drug tested so that she can pay for the tests.

25

324. On August 17, 2018, Ms. Collier sent an e-mail to her case manager.

26

325. Ms. Collier wrote:

27 28
7728046

“Tasc has really been putting a big strain on my pockets. … I am very concerned that I will end up homeless again
31

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 32 of 39

1

trying to sacrifice rent for tasc as this is putting Me [sic] in

2

a bad space. I have been donating plasma whenever I have

to test to get the money I need to pay for it, but I am afraid

3

it is affecting my health. I am willing to test whenever I'm

4

required but I cannot afford the fees. Is there anyway [sic] that I can test without having to pay for it?”

5

6

326. Ms. Collier’s case worker replied, “You have to pay for the program in

7 order to complete the program. I understand that this is cost effective [sic] but in order

8 for you to have you [sic] felony dismissed with prejudice you will have to complete all

9 program requirement [sic] which includes paying all fees associated with the

10 program.”29

11

CLASS ACTION ALLEGATIONS

12

327. The named Plaintiffs bring this case as a class action pursuant to Rules

13 23(a) and 23(b)(3) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

14

328. The Class is defined as: All people who, since August 23, 2016, and until

15 the trial of this case, (1) were enrolled in the marijuana diversion program operated by

16 Defendants TASC and MCAO; (2) satisfied all program requirements in the first 90

17 days of the program other than payment of program fees; and (3) were not considered

18 for successful completion after 90 days solely because they were unable to pay the

19 required fees.

20

329. The class members are readily ascertainable: the names and relevant

21 records of the class members are in Defendants’ possession.

22

Numerosity: Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(a)(1)

23

330. On information and belief, the Class includes at least several hundred

24 members.

25

26
27 29 In her response, the case worker also suggested that Ms. Collier could apply for insurance to alleviate the costs of one of the mandatory treatment classes. This would
28 do nothing to relieve the costs of program fees or the fees for drug and alcohol tests. 32
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 33 of 39

1

331. During the 2017 fiscal year (July 1, 2016 through July 30, 2017), there

2 were 2687 admittances to the possession of marijuana diversion program.

3

332. The marijuana diversion program has maintained similar numbers of

4 admittances in its last several years of operation.

5

333. Therefore, there were likely at least 2500 admittances in the 2018 fiscal

6 year.

7

334. Thus, if even a small percentage of the people admitted to TASC since

8 August 23, 2016 meet the requirements for the Class, the Class would number in the

9 hundreds.

10

335. Moreover, on information and belief, a large majority of those arrested

11 and prosecuted for marijuana possession in Maricopa County are deemed indigent for

12 the purposes of appointment of counsel.

13

Commonality: Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(a)(2)

14

336. The Class members’ claims raise common issues of fact and law.

15

337. Those common questions include, but are not limited to:

16

a. Whether Defendants have a policy, practice, and custom of refusing

17

to consider diversion participants for program completion after 90

18

days and beyond solely because they cannot afford to pay the required

19

fees, without inquiring into those participants’ ability to pay;

20

b. Whether Defendants have a policy, practice, and custom of requiring

21

diversion participants who have not paid the required fees to remain

22

on diversion supervision until they have done so, without inquiring

23

into those participants’ ability to pay;

24

c. Whether Defendants’ diversion extension policies (in subparagraphs

25

(a) and (b)) violate the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of

26

the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution;

27

28 33
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 34 of 39

1

d. Whether Defendants have a policy, practice, and custom of requiring

2

diversion participants who remain on diversion solely due to inability

3

to pay to continue to submit to and pay for random drug and alcohol

4

tests; and

5

e. Whether Defendants’ policy of continuing this mandatory drug and

6

alcohol testing for participants who remain on the diversion program

7

solely due to inability to pay violates the Fourth Amendment to the

8

U.S. Constitution.

9

Typicality: Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(a)(3)

10

338. The Named Plaintiffs’ claims are typical of the claims of the members of

11 the Class, and they have the same interests in this case as all other members of the Class

12 that they represent.

13

339. The determination whether the Defendants’ scheme of policies, practices,

14 and customs is unlawful in the ways alleged will determine the claims of the named

15 Plaintiffs and every other class member.

16

Adequacy: Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(a)(4)

17

340. Named Plaintiffs are capable of fairly and adequately protecting the

18 interests of the Class because Named Plaintiffs do not have any interests antagonistic

19 to the Class.

20

341. There are no known conflicts of interest among class members, all of

21 whom have a similar interest in vindicating the constitutional rights to which they are

22 entitled.

23

342. Plaintiffs’ counsel are experienced in civil rights litigation and have

24 successfully litigated a number of civil rights class action cases.

25

343. Many of those cases, like this one, involve unconstitutional penalties

26 based solely on wealth status.

27

28 34
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 35 of 39

1

Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(b)(3)

2

344. Class treatment under Rule 23(b)(3) is appropriate because the common

3 questions of law and fact overwhelmingly predominate in this case.

4

345. For every Named Plaintiff, as well as for the members of the Class, this

5 case turns on what the Defendants’ policies and practices are and on whether those

6 policies are lawful.

7

346. The common questions of law and fact listed above are dispositive

8 questions in the case of every member of the Class.

9

347. Moreover, the question of liability can therefore be determined on a class-

10 wide basis.

11

348. To the extent that individual damages will vary, they will vary depending

12 in large part on the amount of time that a person was subjected to the unlawful scheme

13 and the amount of money coerced from them.

14

349. Determining damages for individual class members can thus typically be

15 handled in a ministerial fashion based on easily verifiable records in the Defendants’

16 possession.

17

350. If need be, individual hearings on class members’ specific damages based

18 on special circumstances and particular hardships caused by Defendants’ scheme can

19 be held after class-wide liability is determined.

20

CLAIMS FOR RELIEF

21

Count One: Wealth-Based Discrimination in Violation of the

22

Fourteenth Amendment

23 Brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 by Named Plaintiffs Deshawn Briggs and Mark

Pascale on behalf of themselves and all others similarly situated against all

24

Defendants for damages; and by Plaintiff Taja Collier on her own behalf against

25

Defendant TASC for injunctive relief.

26

351. Defendants, acting in concert under color of state law, enacted, enforced,

27 and continue to enforce a policy, practice, and custom of subjecting diversion

28 35
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 36 of 39

1 participants to longer terms of diversion supervision, which include in-person reporting,

2 drug and alcohol testing requirements, and increased payments, solely because of their

3 inability to pay fees associated with the program.

4

352. This policy, practice, and custom of penalizing individuals based solely

5 on wealth status violates the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of the

6 Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

7

353. As a direct and proximate cause of Defendants’ unlawful policy, practice,

8 and custom, Plaintiffs have suffered violations of their constitutional rights and thus are

9 entitled to compensatory damages for their injuries.

10

354. Defendant TASC’s actions were willful, deliberate, and malicious, and

11 involved reckless or callous indifference to Plaintiffs’ constitutional rights.

12 Accordingly, Plaintiffs are entitled to recover punitive damages—in addition to

13 compensatory damages—against Defendant TASC.

14

355. Plaintiff Collier is still a participant in Defendants’ diversion program and

15 cannot afford to pay the fees required to successfully complete the program.

16

356. Ms. Collier seeks to enjoin Defendant TASC from forcing her to remain

17 on diversion solely because she cannot afford to pay the fees necessary to successfully

18 complete the diversion program.

19 Count Two: Unreasonable Searches and Seizures in Violation of the Fourth and

20

Fourteenth Amendments

21 Brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 by Named Plaintiffs Deshawn Briggs and Mark

Pascale on behalf of themselves and all others similarly situated against all

22

Defendants for damages; and by Plaintiff Taja Collier on her own behalf against

23

Defendant TASC for injunctive relief.

24

357. Defendants, acting in concert under color of state law, enacted, enforced,

25 and continue to enforce a policy, practice, and custom of requiring urinalysis to test for

26 drug and alcohol consumption for individuals who remain on the marijuana diversion

27 program solely because they were unable to pay the required fees.

28 36
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 37 of 39

1

358. This policy, practice, and custom violates the right to be free from

2 unreasonable searches and seizures under the Fourth Amendment to the U.S.

3 Constitution.

4

359. As a direct and proximate cause of Defendants’ unlawful policy, practice,

5 and custom, Plaintiffs have suffered violations of their bodily liberty and integrity and

6 are entitled to compensatory damages for their injuries.

7

360. Defendant TASC’s actions were knowing, willful, deliberate, and

8 malicious, and involved reckless or callous indifference to Plaintiffs’ constitutional

9 rights. Accordingly, Plaintiffs are entitled to recover punitive damages—in addition to

10 compensatory damages—against Defendant TASC.

11

361. Plaintiff Collier is still a participant in Defendants’ diversion program and

12 cannot afford to pay the fees required to successfully complete the program.

13

362. Plaintiff Collier therefore requests that this Court enjoin Defendant TASC

14 from requiring her to take drug and alcohol tests solely because she cannot afford to

15 pay the fees necessary to successfully complete the diversion program.

16

Count Three: Wealth-Based Discrimination in Violation of the

17

Fourteenth Amendment

18 Brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 by Plaintiff Taja Collier on her own behalf against all Defendants for damages and against Defendant TASC for injunctive relief.
19

20

363. Defendants, acting in concert under color of state law, enacted, enforced,

21 and continue to enforce a policy, practice, and custom of not allowing participants in

22 Defendants’ diversion program to complete drug and alcohol tests unless those

23 participants can pay for them at the time of the test.

24

364. Defendants, acting in concert under color of state law, also enacted,

25 enforced, and continue to enforce a policy, practice, and custom of failing participants

26 from the program because those participants were not permitted to take drug and

27 alcohol tests solely because they were unable to afford them.

28 37
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 38 of 39

1

365. These policies, practices, and customs penalized Plaintiff Collier based

2 solely on her wealth status in violation of the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses

3 of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

4

366. As a direct and proximate cause of Defendants’ unlawful policies,

5 practices, and customs, Plaintiff Collier suffered violations of her constitutional rights

6 and thus is entitled to compensatory damages for her injuries.

7

367. Defendant TASC’s actions were willful, deliberate, and malicious, and

8 involved reckless or callous indifference to Plaintiff Collier’s constitutional rights.

9 Accordingly, she is entitled to recover punitive damages—in addition to compensatory

10 damages—against Defendant TASC.

11

368. Plaintiff Collier is still a participant in Defendants’ diversion program and

12 cannot afford to pay the program’s fees or the fees required to take drug and alcohol

13 tests.

14

369. Plaintiff Collier therefore seeks to enjoin Defendant TASC from refusing

15 to allow her to take drug and alcohol tests solely because she is unable to pay for them.

16

370. Plaintiff Collier also seeks to enjoin Defendant TASC from terminating

17 her from the diversion program because she did not take drug and alcohol tests solely

18 because she could not afford them.

19

REQUEST FOR RELIEF

20

WHEREFORE, the Plaintiffs demand a jury trial for all issues so appropriate

21 and request this Court to issue the following relief:

22

A. That this action be certified as a class action pursuant to Rule 23 of the

23 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, declaring Named Plaintiffs Deshawn Briggs and

24 Mark Pascale as representatives of the Class and Named Plaintiffs’ counsel as counsel

25 for the Class;

26

27

28 38
7728046

Case 2:18-cv-02684-SPL Document 1 Filed 08/23/18 Page 39 of 39

1

B. A judgment compensating the Plaintiffs and the Class of similarly

2 situated individuals for the damages that they suffered as a result of the Defendants’

3 unconstitutional and unlawful conduct in an amount to be determined at trial;

4

C. A judgment granting the punitive damages authorized by statute based

5 on Defendant TASC’s willful and egregious violations of the law;

6

D. A judgment enjoining Defendant TASC from further unconstitutional

7 conduct against Plaintiff Taja Collier;

8

E. An order and judgment granting reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs

9 pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1988 and 18 U.S.C. § 1964; and

10

F. Such other and further relief as the Court deems just and proper.

11 DATED this 23rd day of August, 2018.

12 OSBORN MALEDON, P.A.
13

14

By s/ Joshua D. Bendor

Timothy J. Eckstein

15

Joshua D. Bendor

2929 N. Central Ave., Suite 2100

16

Phoenix, Arizona 85012-2793

17

CIVIL RIGHTS CORPS 18

A. Dami Animashaun* (pro hac vice

19

application to be filed)

Katherine Chamblee-Ryan** (pro hac vice

20

application to be filed)

910 17th Street NW, Second Floor

21

Washington, D.C. 20002

22

Attorneys for Plaintiffs

23

*Admitted to practice solely in New York. Not admitted in the District of

24

Columbia; practice limited pursuant to D.C. App. R. 49(c), with supervision by

Alec Karakatsanis, a member of the D.C. Bar.

25

26

**Admitted to practice in New York, Georgia, and Alabama. Not admitted in

the District of Columbia; practice limited pursuant to D.C. App. R. 49(c), with

27

supervision by Alec Karakatsanis, a member of the D.C. Bar.

28 39
7728046

