The ever-increasing volume and highly irregular nature of data rates pose new challenges to DSPS. One such challenge is how to accurately ingest and integrate data streams from various sources and locations into an analytics platform. This demands new strategies and systems that can offer the desired degree of scalability and robustness in handling failures. Another interesting research gap revealed by this study is the lack of a well-organized benchmark for measuring the performance of DSPEs. There is a need for benchmarking DSPEs using attributes such as performance, security, and integration with big data tools and libraries for different use cases. Most of the previous surveys and comparative studies of DSPEs suggest that there are features that are common to most DSPEs such as the use of Java Virtual Machine (JVM), however, the ranking and recommendations for DSPEs for different use cases remain an active research area. There is also a need for big data stream mining systems that can combine machine learning algorithms and distributed stream processing in a single platform under an open source umbrella  . Spark and Flink are among the cutting edge DSPEs with these capabilities but more work is needed on the extension and integration of analytic libraries with DSPEs. For instance, there are many machine learning algorithms that are not yet supported in Spark Streaming and Structured Streaming. The use case scenario discussed in this paper shows the inherent complexity of streaming data processing systems due to the need to include multiple data processing and management components, install these components on distributed computing resources that must be coordinated and managed, define and schedule data processing pipelines to be executed efficiently, and deliver the results in the desired format. There are many commercial or proprietary DSPSs which facilitate stream processing, but such systems provide limited flexibility for customization in choosing the different components of the DSPS. Researchers and developers can also build custom DSPS using open source software and tools, which can be extended as needed with new software code and deployed as a centralized or distributed multi-cluster system with preferred data storage and query systems. The rapid growth of data in volume, veracity, and velocity has enabled exciting new opportunities and presented huge operational, data storage, and knowledge management challenges. There is a need for research on systematic comparative analysis and recommendations of databases or persistent stores for large streaming data. In addition, knowledge mining and management strategies are needed to identify, represent and store only the important data stream components and extracted knowledge instead of the massive raw data for further analytics and decision support.