Storm provides abstractions for bolts to manage (save and retrieve) the state of its operations. Currently, Storm has a default in-memory based state implementation and also a Redis backed implementation that provides state persistence. The only supported state implementation in Storm, at the time of writing this paper, is the KeyValueState, which provides key-value mapping. At a high level, structured streaming tracks state in a manner similar in both its micro-batch and continuous modes. The state of an application is tracked using two external storage systems, a write-ahead log that supports durable, atomic writes at low latency, and a state store that can store larger amounts of data durably and allows parallel access (e.g., S3 or HDFS). Structured streaming uses these systems together to recover from failure BIB13838003 . Flink's ecosystem of modules and services built on its core offers different flavours of external state access and isolation. Each stream operation in Flink can declare its own state and update it continuously in order to maintain a summary of the data seen so far BIB19267921 . State information during Flink's operations is maintained in an embedded key/value store [78] . Kafka Streams provides applications with powerful, elastic, highly scalable, and fault-tolerant stateful processing capabilities. Kafka Streams provides state stores, which can be used by stream processing applications to store and query data, which is an important capability for implementing stateful operations. These state stores can either be a RocksDB database, an in-memory hashmap, or another convenient data structure [79] . IBM Streams operators can be configured to keep state information between subsequent tuples. This is achieved using tuple history, operator windows, operator custom logic, or primitive operators. The tuple history approach means that expressions in parameters or output assignments of operator invocations can refer directly to tuples received in the past. This is because history access maintains a list of tuples that can be subscripted by using the input port name. The operator windows approach uses a window which is a logical container for tuples recently received by an input port of an operator. The operator custom logic approach is made up of local operators' states that persist across operator firings and statements. An operator fires and statements get executed when an input port receives a tuple or a punctuation. Finally, the primitive operators which can either be generic or non-generic are user-written operators with some state mechanisms built into them. These are often controlled by the developers of the operators  .