A DSPS can be deployed on a single machine consisting of multiple components, where each component directly calls the next component(s) in the processing pipeline. For greater throughput, efficiency, and fault tolerance, large stream processing systems are set up on multiple distributed machines with the help of additional software stack. A simple Extract, Transform, and Load (ETL) transactional DSPS architecture for processing IoT streams was proposed by Meehan et al.  . The architecture comprises three main components (i) stream collection for data ingestion, (ii) streaming ETL engine for real-time query processing, and (iii) an Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) backend for handling long-running queries. A data migrator component is used to connect the ETL and the OLAP components to facilitate data transformations. The DSPS at Facebook BIB207235120 is relatively complex and powers many use cases such as the real-time reporting of aggregated voice of Facebook users, analytics for mobile applications, and insights for Facebook page administrators. It is made up of data sources such as mobile and web products; Scribe as a data distribution tool; stream processing systems such as Puma, Stylus, and Swift; and data stores such as Laser, Scuba, and Hive. The Facebook DSPS flow is a complex Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) comprising of data streams from the mobile and web products that are fed into Scribe. Real-time data processing systems read from and write to Scribe. The data stores also use Scribe for data ingestion and serve different types of queries. According to Psaltis and de Assuncao et al. BIB38200299 ,  , the architecture of a DSPS is generally multi-tiered and is composed of many loosely coupled components that include data sources, data collection systems, data storage systems, messaging systems, and stream processing and delivery systems.