The ability to handle and process continuous data streams is becoming an essential part of building a data-driven organization. Data streams are sequences of unbounded tuples generated continuously in time BIB7036633 . Unbounded and global datasets such as Web logs, mobile usage statistics, and sensor networks are increasingly becoming common in day-to-day businesses BIB17844806 . Streaming data is also increasingly getting important for social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn BIB14099949 . Unlike traditional batch processing which involves processing of static data, streaming or online processing involves processing dynamic or continuous data  . Extracting meaningful and timely insights from unbounded data is very challenging. Recent demands for scalable and low latency The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Fabrizio Messina . analytics tools  have revealed various shortcomings of traditional batch processing systems such as MapReduce BIB214797870 and Hive  . Batch processing systems suffer from latency problems due to the need to collect input data into batches before it can be processed. Under several application scenarios such as fraud detection in financial transactions and healthcare analytics involving digital sensors and Internet of Things (IoT), continuous data streams must be processed under very short delays BIB38200299 . This is because certain types of data streams such as stock values, credit card transactions, traffic conditions, time-sensitive patient data, and trending news rapidly depreciate in value if not processed instantly. Thus, the ability to handle and process continuous streams of data is becoming an essential part of building today's datadriven organizations. Currently many tools exist for ingesting, processing, storing, indexing, and managing streaming data, which makes it a difficult task for practitioners to select the right combination of tools and platforms for building data stream analytics applications  . The main motivation of this paper is to strive to alleviate this task by first identifying the major components of a modern Data Stream Processing System (DSPS). Before choosing a DSPS or any of its components, it is important to understand and evaluate why it is necessary, what is needed and what are the available options. Data Stream Processing Engines (DSPEs) lie at the core of DSPSs and enable the definition and execution of stream processing pipelines. According to Russo et al. BIB190008661 , DSPEs have emerged as key enablers to develop pervasive services that process data in a near real-time fashion. However, with the myriad of DSPEs that exist today, the large design space for DSPSs, and the intermingle of technical and marketing content from the different vendors and platforms, it is challenging to map design requirements to efficient and compatible hybrid solutions. This underscores the need for systematic studies to showcase advances in tools enabling data stream processing and open challenges, which form the basis of further research. A number of literature reviews on DSPEs have emerged in recent years. Some of the early DSPE survey papers include the reports by Kamburugamuve et al.  and Bockermann  , a selective survey of tools enabling data stream processing by Gorawski et al.  and a survey of open source near real-time technologies by Liu et al. BIB15604829 . Other surveys of DSPEs and their applications in various domains have been outlined in BIB14472531 - BIB15237479 . Recent surveys on DSPEs include a taxonomy of DSPEs by Zhao et al.  , a global view of some popular DSPEs by Kolajo et al BIB174821001 and a performance comparison of some of the existing DSPEs with regards to time-series analysis by Gehring et al.  . Our work extends these recent studies by reviewing both design and implementation aspects of DSPEs unlike most of the previous surveys which focus either on the design, or the implementation aspect. Besides explaining the usefulness and the key features of DSPEs, this paper also provides insights on the design and implementation choices such as when DSPEs are not the most suitable paradigms, and when to choose distributed or single-node approach. The main contributions of this paper are: 1. An overview of DSPS including usability and architecture. 2. The listing of the key features of DSPEs based on an extensive study of the state-of-the-art DSPEs, which we used to propose a taxonomy of DSPEs. 3. A literature review of DSPEs based on the proposed taxonomy and a critical review of some of the popular DSPEs. 4. A comparison of DSPEs based on the key features. 5. A real-world DSPS use case scenario and the rational for selecting the most appropriate DSPE. 6. A discussion on the open research problems in this area. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes an overview of the architecture and the main components of a general DSPS. Section 3 presents the key features and taxonomy of DSPEs. A literature review of DSPEs encompassing the work of both academic researchers and industry professionals is presented in Section 4. A comparative analysis of some of the cutting edge open source distributed DSPEs (Storm, Spark Streaming, Flink, Kafka Streams, and IBM Streams) is also presented in Section 4. A use case scenario and design considerations for developing a DSPS is presented in Section 5 along with discussions and recommendations for choosing a DSPE for different applications. Section 6 summarizes the paper and draws the conclusion.