The programming model of a DSPEs consist of a processing task which receives stream items from a source, performs some processing, and then emits some items to a sink  . Specifically, a programming model is an abstraction of the DSPE that allows for stream transformations and processing. Given the unbounded nature of streaming data, it is therefore, not feasible to have a global view of the incoming streaming data  . Hence, data is processed in chunks by defining finite, bounded time windows on top of an infinite data stream. A window in DSPEs is usually defined by either a time duration or a record count. The time-based window speci- fies a moving view that decomposes a stream into subsets and computes a result over each subset BIB14501573 , BIB18462992 while the count-based window is sized by the number of events included in the window. This enables transformations to be executed on the records contained in the window  . Time-based windows are common in stream applications BIB11875036 . Luu  described three commonly used timebased windowing patterns that most modern DSPEs support as shown in Fig. 2 . (i) Fixed or tumbling windows divide the incoming data stream into fixed-size segments, each with a window length, a start time, and an end time. Each incoming piece of data gets slotted into one and only one fixed window making it easy to perform aggregation transformations. (ii) Sliding windows divide the incoming stream of data into fixed-size segments, each with a window length and a sliding interval. If the sliding interval is the same size as the window length, then it is the same as the fixed window. If the sliding interval is smaller than the window length, then one or more pieces of data will be included in more than one sliding window; aggregation transformations in a sliding window will produce a smoother result than in the fixed window because of the overlapping of the windows. (iii) Session windows, unlike the fixed and sliding windows, do not have a predetermined window length. Instead, it is determined usually by a gap of inactivity that is greater than some threshold. A session is a burst of user activity followed by period of inactivity or timeout  . Many transformations on streams are carried out on each record independently and are often called stateless. Among the common types of stateless transformations are (i) Map, which transforms one record to another record, (ii) Filter, which filters out the records that do not satisfy a given predicate and (iii) FlatMap, which transforms each record to a stream and then flattens these streams into a single stream by combining the stream elements. Transformations that require the processor to maintain internal state across the records and are called stateful. Common types of stateful transformations are (i) Aggregation, which combines all the records to produce a single value, (ii) Group-and-aggregate, which extracts a grouping key from the record and computes a separate aggregated value for each key, (iv) Join, which joins same-keyed records from several streams, and (v) Sort, which sorts the records observed in the stream. In stateful transformations, all the ingested records within a specified time window are included in the compu-tation. The concept of windowing, meaningfully bounds the scope of the aggregation and can represent distinct or partially overlapped time frames  . In summary, DSPEs can do real time streaming data processing where tuples are processed as soon as they arrive or do batch data processing where time windows are used to split the tuples into batches or do both. A batch of stream elements for a given stream is a finite subset of the stream in a time interval. Distributed DSPEs usually process incoming data streams either natively (one tuple at a time) or in micro batches. A query or process is represented as a DAG consisting of a set of node operators, and the source and sink data stream operators. Operators can be either stateless or stateful. Most distributed DSPEs use the continuous operator model BIB11265470 where streaming computations are performed by a set of long-lived stateful operators. Each operator processes data stream records as they arrive by updating the internal state and sending new records in response BIB11151974 .