Storm relies on a strategy called acking mechanism to replay tuples in case of failures. This mechanism tracks the completion of each tuple tree with a checksum hash. The checksum will be zero if all tuples have been successfully acknowledged. Every topology in Storm has a ''message timeout'' associated with it; hence, if Storm fails to detect that a spout tuple has been completed within that timeout, it will be considered to have failed the tuple and then it will be replayed later. The mechanism periodically (default to every second) checkpoints the state of the bolt to ensure that the bolt is initialized to its previous state during a system crash or restart. Structured Streaming ensures an end-to-end exactly-once fault-tolerance guarantees through checkpointing and writeahead logs. Structured Streaming checkpointing system uses a larger-scale state store to hold snapshots of operator states for long-running aggregation operators. The write-ahead log approach keeps track of which data has been processed and reliably written to the output sink from each input source. This log can be integrated with the sink to make updates to the sink atomic BIB13838003 . Flink implements fault tolerance using a combination of stream replay and checkpointing. A streaming dataflow in Flink can be resumed from a checkpoint while maintaining consistency or exactly-once processing semantics. This is achieved by restoring the state of the operators and replaying the events from the checkpoint [78] . Kafka Streams builds on a fault-tolerance capability integrated natively within the Kafka core. Kafka partitions are highly available and replicated, as such when a data stream is persisted to Kafka, it is available even if the application fails and needs to re-process it. Tasks in Kafka Streams leverage the fault-tolerance capability offered by the Kafka consumer to handle failures. If a task runs on a machine that fails, Kafka Streams automatically restarts the task in one of the remaining running instances of the application [79] . IBM Streams provides a number of facilities to allow recovery from failed hardware and software components  . IBM Streams provides support for the following failure recovery: (i) operator state by providing a checkpointing mechanism at regular intervals; (ii) failed processing elements by maintaining the status of each processing element using the Streams management services; (iii) failed application hosts by either restarting the host controller service or pausing/stopping the failed hosts; and (iv) management hosts by persisting the state of the critical management services and recovering it when the services are restarted. Streams applications can also achieve fault tolerance through user-applied consistent regions  . The summary of features of the selected five DSPEs considered in this study is described in TABLE 2.