With so many DSPE choices, Gnowit will have to factor in a number of things before picking the right DSPE for their stream processing needs. This is because the DSPE is the core component of a DSPS. Often, the choice of DSPE will determine the choice of other components of the DSPS. The main criteria that we considered for selecting the DSPE for this case study include support for a variety of programming languages, manageability and ease of integration with other data processing systems; other factors include the availability of a rich set of tools for data engineers like libraries for machine learning, complex event processing, graph processing and streaming SQL. Spark Structured Streaming and Flink turned out to be the two options that were well suited for this case study. Finally, we chose the Spark ecosystem because of its maturity and current user base. Fig. 9 shows the different components that were selected to build such a DSPS. Data streams are ingested and preprocessed in Kafka  , a distributed messaging and streaming platform. Kafka brokers publish the ingested streams as topics that are further processed and analysed using Solr, Hadoop, or Spark clusters BIB5054652 . Topics from Kafka are saved in a Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS). Spark is used for distributed parallel execution of analytics processes to extract further knowledge from the data as needed. Solr is a real-time multilingual intelligent keyword searching and content clustering tool. Streaming data can be processed by Spark Structured Streaming and stored in efficient big data storage systems such as Cassandra. The extracted knowledge can be used to define machine learning models for predictive analytics to build a Decision Support System (DSS) sending outputs to a visualization tool. Thus, the framework supports processing and storage of large volumes of both streaming and batch data using Spark MLlib and Structured Streaming for decision support.