Storm provides complete control over how tuples are partitioned among the many tasks of a bolt subscribed to a stream using a feature called stream grouping. There are eight built-in and a custom stream grouping in Storm, these are (i) Shuffle, where tuples are randomly distributed across the bolt's tasks in a way such that each bolt is guaranteed to get an equal number of tuples. (ii) Fields, where the stream is partitioned by the fields specified in the grouping. (iii) Partial key, where the stream is partitioned by the fields specified in the grouping but are load balanced between two downstream bolts to provide better utilization of resources  . (iv) All, where the stream is replicated across all the bolt's tasks. (v) Global, where the entire stream goes to a single one of the bolt's tasks (usually the task with the lowest id). (vi) None, which does not care how the stream is grouped. (vii) Direct, which means that the producer of the tuple decides which task of the consumer will receive this tuple. (viii) Local, where tuples are shuffled to just those in-process tasks if the target bolt has one or more tasks in the same worker process, otherwise, it acts like a normal shuffle. (ix) Custom, which is achieved by implementing the Storm's custom stream grouping interface. Spark automatically partitions RDDs and distributes the partitions across different nodes.Hash and Range are the common partitioning strategies supported in Spark. In hash partitioning, data is evenly spread across various partitions. However, in range partitioning, data tuples having key values within a given range will appear on the same machine  . Flink programs are inherently parallel and distributed. During execution, a stream in Flink has one or more stream partitions and each operator has one or more operator subtasks. Streams can transport data between two operators in a one-to-one pattern; this preserve the same partitioning and ordering of the elements. Streams can also transport data in a redistributing pattern by using partitioning strategies such as hashing or random re-partitions; this changes the original partitioning of streams [78] . Kafka Streams partitions data for processing while the messaging layer in the Kafka ecosystem partitions data for storing and transporting. In both cases, this partitioning enables data locality, elasticity, scalability, high performance, and fault tolerance. Kafka Streams uses the concepts of stream partitions and stream tasks as logical units of its parallelism model. Each stream partition is an ordered sequence of data records that maps to a Kafka topic partition. The Kafka producer picks which partition to send a record to based on the record's key. Records with the same key get sent to the same partition. The default partitioner for Java uses a hash of the record's key to choose the partition or uses a round-robin strategy if the record has no key  . IBM Streams supports a number of different partitioning methods using its DataStage technique  . These methods include (i) Round-robin, which assigns the first record to the first processing node; the second to the second processing node; and so on until it reaches the last processing node. It then starts over again. The round robin method always creates approximately equal-sized partitions; it is useful for resizing partitions of an input data set that are not equal in size. (ii) Random, a method that randomly distributes records across all processing nodes; similar to round robin, this method can rebalance the partitions of an input dataset to guarantee that each processing node receives an approximately equal-sized partition; however, the random partitioning has a slightly higher overhead than round robin because of the extra processing required to calculate a random value for each record. (iii) Same, a method which performs no data repartitioning and output from the preceding stage is fed as is to the next stage. (iv) Entire, where every instance of a DataStage receives the complete data set as input at every processing node. (v) Hash, a method which is based on a function of one or more columns (the hash partitioning keys) of each record; this method examines one or more fields of each input record (the hash key fields) and assigns records having the same values for all hash key fields to the same processing node. (vi) Modulus, which is based on a key column modulo the number of partitions; this method is similar to hash by field but involves simpler computation. (vii) Range, which divides a data set into approximately equal-sized partitions, each of which contains records with key columns within a specified range; this method is also useful for ensuring that related records are in the same partition. (viii) Db2, which partitions an input dataset in the same way that Db2 would partition it. (ix) Auto, which allows the DataStage to determine the best partitioning method to use; typically, DataStage would use 'round robin' when initially partitioning the data, and 'same' for the intermediate stages of a job.