Storm is a native GDSPE. It has several processing layers such as Trident, Streams API, and SQL for processing data streams. There are three basic abstractions in Storm, these are spouts, bolts, and topologies. A spout is a source of streams in a computation, it reads data from message queues, databases, and other external sources and emit tuples to bolts in the topology without performing any processing. A bolt accepts a tuple from a spout, and then persist the data or performs some transformations (such as filtering, aggregation, or join operations) which may lead to the emission of new tuples to its output streams. A topology is a multi-stage stream computation network of spouts and bolts; each edge in the network represent a bolt subscribing to the output stream of some other spout or bolt. Fig. 4 is a simple Twitter stream wordcount topology in Storm. The topology consists of a single spout for ingesting tweet streams and three bolts for word tokenization, counting, and reporting. Spark Streaming is a micro-batch GDSPE, an extension of the core Spark API. The main data abstraction in Spark is called the Resilient Distributed Dataset (RDD). Spark Streaming provides an abstraction which represents a continuous stream of data represented as a sequence of RDDs called Discretized Stream as shown in Fig. 5 . Spark Streaming enables the processing of data streams as a series of small batch jobs thereby achieving end-to-end latencies as low as 100 milliseconds (ms). However, from version 2.3, Spark introduced a Structured Streaming BIB13838003 library, built on the Spark SQL engine. Structured Streaming is based on a new low-latency processing mode called Continuous Processing which can achieve an end-to-end latency as low as 1ms. The evolution of Structured Streaming has made developers to consider Spark Streaming obsolete and not recommended for developing new streaming applications with Spark  . Therefore, further discussion in this paper is focused on Structured Streaming. Flink is a native GDSPE with a support for batch data processing. The basic building blocks of Flink programs are streams and transformation operators mapped to streaming dataflows [78] . A stream is a continuous flow of data records while a transformation is an operation that takes streams as input and produce processed streams as output. Data streams in Flink can be created from message queues, socket streams, or files sources. Common examples of transformations on data streams include filtering, updating state, defining windows, and aggregating. Each dataflow starts with one or more sources and ends in one or more sinks which can be writing data to files or to other outputs. The dataflows in Flink as shown in Fig. 6 , resemble arbitrary DAGs, with one or more sources and one or more sinks. Programs in Flink are inherently parallel and distributed. Aggregating events (e.g., counts, sums on streams are scoped by windows, such as count over the last 50 seconds, or sum of the last 50 elements [78] . Windows can also be time, data driven, session driven as described in Section 3. Kafka Streams is part of the overall Kafka ecosystem which consists of immutable records or messages, stream of records called topics, consumers, producers, brokers, logs, partitions, and clusters. Kafka Streams is a GDSPE. A stream which represents an unbounded and immutable data records is the most important abstraction in Kafka Streams. A processor topology is the feature used in Kafka Streams to define the stream processing computational logic for an application. A topology is simply a graph of stream processors (nodes) that are connected by streams (edges) or shared state stores. There are two special processors (source and sink) in the topology as shown in Fig. 7 . A source processor produces an input stream to its topology from one or multiple Kafka topics by consuming records from these topics and forwarding them to its down-stream processors. A sink processor then sends any received records from its up-stream processors to a specified Kafka topic. The processed results can either be streamed back into Kafka or written to an external system [79] . Kafka Streams offers two ways to define the stream processing topology. The first being the Kafka Streams Domain Specific Language (DSL) which provides the most common data transformation operations such as map, filter, join and aggregations out of the box. The second is the Processor API which enables the definition and connection of custom processors as well as interaction with state stores [79] . Windowing operations are available in the Kafka Streams DSL. IBM Streams is a managed DSPE with a development environment, runtime and analytic toolkits. An IBM Streams application is a directed flow graph of operators  . As shown in Fig. 8 , the fundamental building block of a Streams application is an operator. An operator can have one or more input and output ports. Individual records are structured list of attributes and their data types while a schema is a specification of data types and attributes in a tuple. The operator processes the records in memory and produces a new stream of records as output. The new stream of data is then emitted from the output port of the operator. The operator can process data on a tuple-by-tuple basis or on a window or batches of data.