The data stream processing layer is where the streaming data processing applications or jobs are executed. It can host loosely coupled disjoint applications or a DSPE or both. DSPEs generally offer a set of streaming data processing operators which can be configured and threaded together to build a stream data processing pipeline to analyze incoming data streams  . Many DSPEs exist today some of which are marketed by large software vendors while others were created as a part of open-source research projects. The main categories of DSPEs include Data Stream Management Engines (DSME), Complex Event Processing Engines (CEPE) and general-purpose DSPEs (GDSPE) BIB38200299 . Traditional Database Management Systems (DBMSs) are best equipped to run periodical queries over finite stored data sets. However, many modern data analytics applications such as financial data analytics, and network and sensor data monitoring, need to support continuous queries over dynamic unbounded data streams BIB13258458 . DSMEs provide extensions to DBMSs by enabling long-running queries over dynamic data, providing support for SQL-like operations and declarative interfaces. The basic requirements that a DSME should meet were outlined by Stonebraker et al. BIB2811485 . These requirements include the ability to (i) process continuous data on-the-fly without any requirement to store them, (ii) support high-level languages such as SQL, (iii) handle imperfections such as delayed, missing and out-of-order data, (iv) guarantee predictable and repeatable outcomes, (v) efficiently store, access, modify, and combine (with live streaming data) state information, (vi) ensure that the integrity of the data is maintained at all times and relevant applications are up and available despite failures, (vii) automatically and transparently distribute the data processing load across multiple processors and machines, and (viii) respond to high-volume data processing applications in real-time using a highly optimized execution path. Cutting edge DSMEs include Samza-SQL BIB18610526 , KSQL, and SQLstream Blaze  ,  . CEPE is the core logic of Complex Event Processing (CEP) which denotes application of business rules to streaming event data (such as log or sensor data streams) associated with a timestamp  . This enables useful real-time actions to be taken over data streams  . A CEPE supports exploring relationships among events using specific rules as well as declarative interfaces BIB38200299 . Cutting edge CEPEs include Esper, StreamBase, and WSO2 CEP  ,  , BIB21338219 . Generic-purpose DSPEs (GDSPE) are being developed to perform distributed stream processing with the aim of achieving scalable and fault-tolerant execution on cluster environments. Unlike DBMSs or CEPEs, GDSPEs do not provide declarative interfaces, thereby requiring developers to program applications rather than writing queries. Most modern GDSPEs support streaming SQL and CEPE either natively or through an add-on library. GDSPEs are commonly used to process high volume and velocity of streaming data. A good DSPE should have the ability to process data in real-time and for any given time interval, as well as to peek into the data within a sliding window of time  . Cutting edge GDSPEs include Kafka Streams, Spark Streaming, Storm, Flink, and Samza as listed in TABLE 1 BIB38200299 ,  . There are also many commercial GDSPEs including IBM Streams, Amazon Kinesis, Azure Streams, Google Cloud Dataflow, Facebook's Stylus, Swift, and Puma BIB38200299 , BIB207235120 . The detailed discussion of DSPEs will follow later in the paper.