The traditional approach to processing data at scale is batch processing. Schreiner and Topolnik  described a typical example of a batch processing application in the financial sector where a bank collects and stores its transactional data in a data warehouse during the day. The bank then processes and analyzes the stored data offline after the closing time for decision making. Another scenario described by Dean in his book  , uses a Web search system where crawlers constantly scrape the web and extracts knowledge but relies on batch processing to update its search index every hour. While both scenarios are simple and robust, the batch processing approach utilized in both cases clearly introduces a large latency between gathering the data and being ready to act upon it. The goal of DSPS is to overcome this latency by processing big data volumes and provide useful insights into the data prior to saving it to long-term storage. It processes the live, raw data immediately as it arrives and meets the challenges of incremental processing, scalability, and fault tolerance  . Streaming processing offers the competitive advantage of timeliness and should be used where real-time results matter or when the value of the information contained in the data stream decreases rapidly with time  . Typical example of scenarios that can benefit from DSPS include real-time analytics for systems monitoring and decision support. For example, hospital intensive care units have constant patient health monitoring systems, businesses implement financial news analytics for getting business insights fast, and fraud detection systems for ensuring secured transactions. Also, processing data as it arrives spreads out workloads more evenly over time, thereby, making the consumption of resources more consistent and predictable while enabling real time decision support  . Stream processing, however, raises new operational challenges and introduces new semantics for analytics  . To achieve low latency, a DSPS must be able to perform message processing without having a costly storage operation. It should also be able to handle imperfections in the data streams and process delayed, missing and out-of-order data. A detailed discussion on the requirement of a DSPS, is provided by Stonebraker et al. BIB2811485 .