Storm offers several levels of message processing guarantees. These include best effort, at least once, and exactly once through Trident, a higher-level abstraction in Storm. Trident has consistent, exactly-once semantics and adds primitives for doing stateful, incremental processing on top of any database or persistence store. Structured Streaming provides fast, scalable, faulttolerant, end-to-end and exactly-once stream processing using a micro-batch processing engine. These guarantees can be achieved by selecting the relevant mode based on the application requirements without changes in the Dataset or DataFrame operations. An at-least-once guarantee in Structured Streaming is achieved with the Continuous Processing model. The mechanism for message processing guarantees in Flink ensures that even in the presence of failures, the program's state will eventually reflect every record from the data stream exactly once. Flink can guarantee exactly-once state updates to user-defined state only when the source participates in the checkpointing mechanism. In addition to exactlyonce state semantics, Flink can also guarantee an end-toend exactly-once record delivery, provided that the data sink participates in the checkpointing mechanism. Starting from version 0.11.0, Kafka has added an endto-end exactly-once processing semantics which guarantees that for any record read from the source Kafka topics, its processing results will be reflected exactly once in the output Kafka topic as well as in the state stores for stateful operations [79] . Consistent region is a recent concept introduced in IBM Streams for providing resiliency to streams applications by providing the ability to recover from failures. On a failure, an IBM Streams application is reset to its last successfully persisted state; this allows source operators in the application to replay tuples submitted after the restored state. Consistent region replay usually enables applications to achieve an exactly-once tuple processing semantic. For all other use cases, the replay enables applications to achieve at-least-once processing semantic BIB10979565 .