Many of the existing multi-document summarization methods have two limitations BIB189209 : 1) They consider the sentences as independent of each other, so topics embedded in the documents are disregarded. 2) Sentence scores computed by most existing approaches typically do not have very clear probabilistic interpretations, and many of the sentence scores are calculated using heuristics. Bayesian topic models are probabilistic models that uncover and represent the topics of documents. They are quite powerful and appealing, because they represent the information (i.e. topics) that are lost in other approaches. Their advantage in describing and representing topics in detail enables the development of summarizer systems which can determine the similarities and differences between documents to be used in summarization BIB9177142 . Apart from enhancement of topic and document representation, topic models often utilize a distinct measure for scoring the sentence called Kullbak-Liebler (KL). The KL is a measure of difference (divergence) between two probability distributions P and Q  . In summarization where we have probability of words, the KL divergence of Q from P over the words w is defined as : where P(w) and Q(w) are probabilities of w in P and Q. KL divergence is an interesting method for scoring sentences in the summarization, because it shows the fact that good summaries are intuitively similar to the input documents. It describes how the importance of words alters in the summary in comparison with the input, i.e. the KL divergence of a good summary and the input will be low. Probabilistic topic models have gained dramatic attention in recent years in various domains [4-7, 17, 28, 44, 57] . Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) model is the state of the art unsupervised technique for extracting thematic information (topics) of a collection of documents. A complete review for LDA can be found in BIB3177797  , but the main idea is that documents are represented as a random mixture of latent topics, where each topic is a probability distribution over words. LDA has been extensively used for multi-document summarization recently. For example, Daume et al. BIB6241932 proposed B S , a Bayesian summarization model for query-focused summarization. Wang et al. BIB189209 introduced a Bayesian sentence-based topic model for summarization which used both term-document and term-sentence associations. Their system achieved significance performance and outperformed many other summarization methods. Celikyilmaz et al. BIB5833592 describe multi-document summarization as a prediction problem based on a two-phase hybrid model. First, they propose a hierarchical topic model to discover the topic structures of all sentences. Then, they compute the similarities of candidate sentences with human-provided summaries using a novel tree-based sentence scoring function. In the second step they make use of these scores and train a regression model according the lexical and structural characteristics of the sentences, and employ the model to score sentences of new documents (unseen documents) to form a summary.