Graph methods, which are influenced by PageRank algorithm  , represent the documents as a connected graph. Sentences form the vertices of the graph and edges between the sentences indicate how similar the two sentences are. A common technique employed to connect two vertices is to measure the similarity of two sentences and if it is greater then a threshold they are connected. The most often used method for similarity measure is cosine similarity with TFIDF weights for words. This graph representation results in two outcomes. First, the partitions (sub-graphs) included in the graph, create discrete topics covered in the documents. The second outcome is the identification of the important sentences in the document. Sentences that are connected to many other sentences in the partition are possibly the center of the graph and more likely to be included in the summary. Graph-based methods can be used for single as well as multidocument summarization BIB506350 . Since they do not need languagespecific linguistic processing other than sentence and word boundary detection, they can also be applied to various languages BIB8878897 . Nonetheless, using TFIDF weighting scheme for similarity measure has limitations, because it only preserves frequency of words and does not take the syntactic and semantic information into account. Thus, similarity measures based on syntactic and semantic information enhances the performance of the summarization system  . For more graph-based approaches, see BIB556431 .