Since word probability techniques depend on a stop word list in order to not consider them in the summary and because deciding which words to put in the stop list is not very straight forward, there is a need for more advanced techniques. One of the more advanced and very typical methods to give weight to words is TFIDF (Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency). This weighting technique assesses the importance of words and identifies very common words (that should be omitted from consideration) in the document(s) by giving low weights to words appearing in most documents. The weight of each word w in document d is computed as follows: where f d (w) is term frequency of word w in the document d, f D (w) is the number of documents that contain word w and |D| is the number of documents in the collection D. For more information about TFIDF and other term weighting schemes, see  . TFIDF weights are easy and fast to compute and also are good measures for determining the importance of sentences, therefore many existing summarizers BIB1470848 BIB4490918 BIB506350 have utilized this technique (or some form of it). Centroid-based summarization, another set of techniques which has become a common baseline, is based on TFIDF topic representation. This kind of method ranks sentences by computing their salience using a set of features. A complete overview of the centroidbased approach is available in BIB6354619 but we outline briefly the basic idea. The first step is topic detection and documents that describe the same topic clustered together. To achieve this goal, TFIDF vector representations of the documents are created and those words whose TFIDF scores are below a threshold are removed. Then, a clustering algorithm is run over the TFIDF vectors, consecutively adding documents to clusters and recomputing the centroids according to: where c j is the centroid of the jth cluster and C j is the set of documents that belong to that cluster. Centroids can be considered as pseudo-documents that consist of those words whose TFIDF scores are higher than the threshold and form the cluster. The second step is using centroids to identify sentences in each cluster that are central to topic of the entire cluster. To accomplish this goal, two metrics are defined  : cluster-based relative utility (CBRU) and cross-sentence informational subsumption (CSIS). CBRU decides how relevant a particular sentence is to the general topic of the entire cluster and CSIS measure redundancy among sentences. In order to approximate two metrics, three features (i.e. central value, positional value and first-sentence overlap) are used. Next, the final score of each sentence is computed and the selection of sentences is determined. For another related work, see BIB9849366 .