When assigning weights of words in topic representations, we can think of binary (0 or 1) or real-value (continuous) weights and decide which words are more correlated to the topic. The two most common techniques in this category are: word probability and TFIDF (Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency). 3.2.1 Word Probability. The simplest method to use frequency of words as indicators of importance is word probability. The probability of a word w is determined as the number of occurrences of the word, f (w), divided by the number of all words in the input (which can be a single document or multiple documents): Vanderwende et al. BIB10496513 proposed the SumBasic system which uses only the word probability approach to determine sentence importance. For each sentence, S j , in the input, it assigns a weight equal to the average probability of the words in the sentence: where (S j ) is the weight of sentence S j . In the next step, it picks the best scoring sentence that contains the highest probability word. This step ensures that the highest probability word, which represents the topic of the document at that point, is included in the summary. Then for each word in the chosen sentence, the weight is updated: This word weight update indicates that the probability of a word appearing in the summary is lower than a word occurring once. The aforementioned selection steps will repeat until the desired length summary is reached. The sentence selection approach used by SumBasic is based on the greedy strategy. Yih et al.  used an optimization approach (as sentence selection strategy) to maximize the occurrence of the important words globally over the entire summary. BIB1470848 is another example of using an optimization approach.