The goal of automatic text summarization is to create summaries that are similar to human-created summaries. However, in many cases, the soundness and readability of created summaries are not satisfactory, because the summaries do not cover all the semantically relevant aspects of data in an effective way. This is because many of the existing text summarization techniques do not consider the semantics of words. A step towards building more accurate summarization systems is to combine summarization techniques with knowledge bases (semantic-based or ontology-based summarizers). The advent of human-generated knowledge bases and various ontologies in many different domains (e.g. Wikipedia, YAGO, DBpedia, etc) has opened further possibilities in text summarization , and reached increasing attention recently. For example, Henning et al.  present an approach to sentence extraction that maps sentences to concepts of an ontology. By considering the ontology features, they can improve the semantic representation of sentences which is beneficial in selection of sentences for summaries. They experimentally showed that ontology-based extraction of sentences outperforms baseline summarizers. Chen et al. BIB13210237 introduce a user query-based text summarizer that uses the UMLS medical ontology to make a summary for medical text. Baralis et al. BIB16155178 propose a Yago-based summarizer that leverages YAGO ontology  to identify key concepts in the documents. The concepts are evaluated and then used to select the most representative document sentences. Sankarasubramaniam et al. BIB43756631 introduce an approach that employs Wikipedia in conjunction with a graph-based ranking technique. First, they create a bipartite sentence-concept graph, and then use an iterative ranking algorithm for selecting summary sentences.