There has been a set of metrics to automatically evaluate summaries since the early 2000s. ROUGE is the most widely used metric for automatic evaluation. 7.3.1 ROUGE. Lin BIB964287 introduced a set of metrics called RecallOriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE) to automatically determine the quality of a summary by comparing it to human (reference) summaries. There are several variations of ROUGE (see BIB964287 ), and here we just mention the most broadly used ones: • ROUGE-n: This metric is recall-based measure and based on comparison of n-grams. a series of n-grams (mostly two and three and rarely four) is elicited from the reference summaries and the candidate summary (automatically generated summary). Let p be "the number of common n-grams between candidate and reference summary", and q be "the number of n-grams extracted from the reference summary only". The score is computed as: • ROUGE-L: This measure employs the concept of longest common subsequence (LCS) between the two sequences of text. The intuition is that the longer the LCS between two summary sentences, the more similar they are. Although this metric is more flexible than the previous one, it has a drawback that all n-grams must be consecutive. For more information about this metric and its refined metric, see BIB964287 . • ROUGE-SU: This metric called skip bi-gram and uni-gram ROUGE and considers bi-grams as well as uni-grams. This metric allows insertion of words between the first and the last words of the bi-grams, so they do not need to be consecutive sequences of words.