Machine learning approaches model the summarization as a classification problem. BIB5775833 is an early research attempt at applying machine learning techniques for summarization. Kupiec et al. develop a classification function, naive-Bayes classifier, to classify the sentences as summary sentences and non-summary sentences based on the features they have, given a training set of documents and their extractive summaries. The classification probabilities are learned statistically from the training data using Bayes' rule: where s is a sentence from the document collection, F 1 , F 2 , . . . , F k are features used in classification and S is the summary to be generated. Assuming the conditional independence between the features: The probability a sentence to belongs to the summary is the score of the sentence. The selected classifier plays the role of a sentence scoring function. Some of the frequent features used in summarization include the position of sentences in the document, sentence length, presence of uppercase words, similarity of the sentence to the document title, etc. Machine learning approaches have been widely used in summarization by BIB36267198 BIB18517541 BIB6459227 , to name a few. Naive Bayes, decision trees, support vector machines, Hidden Markov models and Conditional Random Fields are among the most common machine learning techniques used for summarization. One fundamental difference between classifiers is that sentences to be included in the summary have to be decided independently. It turns out that methods explicitly assuming the dependency between sentences such as Hidden Markov model BIB2767184 and Conditional Random Fields  often outperform other techniques. One of the primary issues in utilizing supervised learning methods for summarization is that they need a set of training documents (labeled data) to train the classifier, which may not be always easily available. Researchers have proposed some alternatives to cope with this issue: • Annotated corpora creation: Creating annotated corpus for summarization greatly benefits the researchers, because more public benchmarks will be available which makes it easier to compare different summarization approaches together. It also lowers the risk of overfitting with a limited data. Ulrich et al.  introduce a publicly available annotated email corpus and its creation process. However, creating annotated corpus is very time consuming and more critically, there is no standard agreement on choosing the sentences, and different people may select varied sentences to construct the summary. • Semi-supervised approaches: Using a semi-supervised technique to train a classifier. In semi-supervised learning we utilize the unlabeled data in training. There is usually a small amount of labeled data along with a large amount of unlabeled data. For complete overview of semisupervised learning, see  . Wong et al. BIB18517541 proposed a semi-supervised method for extractive summarization. They co-trained two classifiers iteratively to exploit unlabeled data. In each iteration, the unlabeled training examples (sentences) with top scores are included in the labeled training set, and the two classifiers are trained on the new training data. Machine learning methods have been shown to be very effective and successful in single and multi-document summarization, specifically in class specific summarization where classifiers are trained to locate particular type of information such as scientific paper summarization BIB622152 BIB324527 BIB1500891 and biographical summaries BIB6578489  BIB1451 .