With the dramatic growth of the Internet, people are overwhelmed by the tremendous amount of online information and documents. Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). arXiv, July 2017, USA © 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00 https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn This expanding availability of documents has demanded exhaustive research in the area of automatic text summarization. According to Radef et al.  a summary is defined as "a text that is produced from one or more texts, that conveys important information in the original text(s), and that is no longer than half of the original text(s) and usually, significantly less than that". Automatic text summarization is the task of producing a concise and fluent summary while preserving key information content and overall meaning. In recent years, numerous approaches have been developed for automatic text summarization and applied widely in various domains. For example, search engines generate snippets as the previews of the documents BIB12487768 . Other examples include news websites which produce condensed descriptions of news topics usually as headlines to facilitate browsing or knowledge extractive approaches BIB5871627 BIB564263 BIB31075570 . Automatic text summarization is very challenging, because when we as humans summarize a piece of text, we usually read it entirely to develop our understanding, and then write a summary highlighting its main points. Since computers lack human knowledge and language capability, it makes automatic text summarization a very difficult and non-trivial task. Automatic text summarization gained attraction as early as the 1950s. An important research of these days was BIB15475171 for summarizing scientific documents. Luhn et al. BIB15475171 introduced a method to extract salient sentences from the text using features such as word and phrase frequency. They proposed to weight the sentences of a document as a function of high frequency words, ignoring very high frequency common words. Edmundson et al.  described a paradigm based on key phrases which in addition to standard frequency depending weights, used the following three methods to determine the sentence weight: (1) Cue Method: The relevance of a sentence is calculated based on the presence or absence of certain cue words in the cue dictionary. (2) Title Method: The weight of a sentence is computed as the sum of all the content words appearing in the title and headings of a text. (3) Location Method: This method assumes that sentences appearing in the beginning of document as well as the beginning of individual paragraphs have a higher probability of being relevant. Since then, many works have been published to address the problem of automatic text summarization (see BIB506350  for more information about more advanced techniques until 2000s). In general, there are two different approaches for automatic summarization: extraction and abstraction. Extractive summarization methods work by identifying important sections of the text and generating them verbatim; thus, they depend only on extraction of sentences from the original text. In contrast, abstractive summarization methods aim at producing important material in a new way. In other words, they interpret and examine the text using advanced natural language techniques in order to generate a new shorter text that conveys the most critical information from the original text. Even though summaries created by humans are usually not extractive, most of the summarization research today has focused on extractive summarization. Purely extractive summaries often times give better results compared to automatic abstractive summaries BIB506350 . This is because of the fact that abstractive summarization methods cope with problems such as semantic representation, inference and natural language generation which are relatively harder than data-driven approaches such as sentence extraction. As a matter of fact, there is no completely abstractive summarization system today. Existing abstractive summarizers often rely on an extractive preprocessing component to produce the abstract of the text BIB15467396 BIB9363872 . Consequently, in this paper we focus on extractive summarization methods and provide an overview of some of the most dominant approaches in this category. There are a number of papers that provide extensive overviews of text summarization techniques and systems BIB16459894 BIB556431   .