Latent semantic analysis (LSA) which is introduced by BIB61894598 , is an unsupervised method for extracting a representation of text semantics based on observed words. Gong and Liu BIB7003631 initially proposed a method using LSA to select highly ranked sentences for single and multi-document summarization in the news domain. The LSA method first builds a term-sentence matrix (n by m matrix), where each row corresponds to a word from the input (n words) and each column corresponds to a sentence (m sentences). Each entry a i j of the matrix is the weight of the word i in sentence j. The weights of the words are computed by TFIDF technique and if a sentence does not have a word the weight of that word in the sentence is zero. Then singular value decomposition (SVD) is used on the matrix and transforms the matrix A into three matrices: A = U ΣV T . Matrix U (n ×m) represents a term-topic matrix having weights of words. Matrix Σ is a diagonal matrix (m × m) where each row i corresponds to the weight of a topic i. Matrix V T is the topicsentence matrix. The matrix D = ΣV T describes how much a sentence represent a topic, thus, d i j shows the weight of the topic i in sentence j. Gong and Liu's method was to choose one sentence per each topic, therefore, based on the length of summary in terms of sentences, they retained the number of topics. This strategy has a drawback due to the fact that a topic may need more than one sentence to convey its information. Consequently, alternative solutions were proposed to improve the performance of LSA-based techniques for summarization. One enhancement was to leverage the weight of each topic to decide the relative size of the summary that should cover the topic, which gives the flexibility of having a variable number of sentences. Another advancement is described in BIB9497619 . Steinberger et al. BIB9497619 introduced a LSA-based method which achieves a significantly better performance than the original work. They realized that the sentences that discuss some of important topics are good candidates for summaries, thus, in order to locate those sentences they defined the weight of the sentence as follows: Let be the "weight" function, then For other variations of LSA technique, see BIB15099252 BIB5228326 .