Query-oriented summarization aims at extracting an informative summary from a document collection for a given query. It is very useful to help users grasp the main information related to a query. Existing work can be mainly classified into two categories: supervised method and unsupervised method. The former requires training examples, which makes the method limited to predefined domains. While the latter usually utilizes clustering algorithms to find ‘centered’ sentences as the summary. However, the method does not consider the query information, thus the summarization is general about the document collection itself. Moreover, most of existing work assumes that documents related to the query only talks about one topic. Unfortunately, statistics show that a large portion of summarization tasks talk about multiple topics. In this paper, we try to break limitations of the existing methods and study a new setup of the problem of multi-topic based query-oriented summarization. We propose using a probabilistic approach to solve this problem. More specifically, we propose two strategies to incorporate the query information into a probabilistic model. Experimental results on two different genres of data show that our proposed approach can effectively extract a multi-topic summary from a document collection and the summarization performance is better than baseline methods. The approach is quite general and can be applied to many other mining tasks, for example product opinion analysis and question answering.