In most truth discovery work, source reliability is a parameter that is positively correlated with the probability of a source asserting truths. However in work BIB14466142  BIB14376137 BIB7923830 BIB8350875 BIB8837716 BIB16314897 , the meaning of this parameter is further enriched to fit more complex application scenarios. In many applications of crowd/social sensing, people want to infer an observation is true or false, for example, whether or not a specific gas station runs out of gas. Thus in BIB8350875 , the authors model the observations from participants as binary variables, and capture the source (participant) reliability by estimating both true positive rate and false positive rate. In LTM BIB8837716 , the authors assume that the true information about an object can contains more than one value, for example, the authors of a book can be more than one. To estimate the quality of a source, it is insufficient to only calculate the probability that this source's provided information is accurate (precision). Furthermore, the source reliability should also capture the probability that this source fails to provide truths (recall). Thus, in the proposed method LTM, both precision and recall are adopted to estimate the source reliability. On the other hand, it is possible that there is no truth for some objects, e.g., the death date of someone who is still alive. Under this scenario, the authors in BIB16314897 propose several new metrics, such as silent rate, false spoken rate and true spoken rate, to describe the source quality. When some sources only provide one or two pieces of information, truth discovery methods may not be able to accurately estimate reliability degrees for these sources. However, such sources are commonly observed and they may contribute to the main part of the collected data. To better deal with such "small" sources, in BIB14466142 , the authors propose a confidence-aware truth discovery approach that outputs the confidence interval of the source reliability estimation. In  , the authors assume that the truths are subjective rather than objective. That is, the identified truths are dependent on the end-users: For different users, the truths can be different. To fit this scenario, instead of representing the reliability of a source as a single scalar, they represent it as three interrelated, but separate values: truthfulness, completeness, and bias. Specifically, truthfulness reflects the probability of a source asserting the truth, completeness reflects the proportion of objects which are covered by a source, and bias is the extent to which a source tends to support a favored position. These three metrics are calculated according to the importance of claims with respect to a specific user, so that they can better reflect users' prior knowledge and preferences. In BIB7923830 , the authors study the problem of selecting a subset of sources in dynamic scenarios for truth discovery. To better capture the time-dependent source quality, they define a set of metrics, including accuracy (truthfulness in  ), coverage (completeness in  ), and freshness (the frequency of updates provided by a source). In the probabilistic model of BIB14376137 , the source reliability has different semantic meanings in different settings: It can indicate the probability of a source asserting truth, or the probability of a source both knowing and telling the truth, or even the probability of a source intending to tell the truth. The model selection depends on the specific application scenarios.