In [14-16, 49, 50, 53] , the authors relax source independence assumption. In these work, the authors try to detect copying relationship among sources, and then adjust the sources' weights according to the detected relationship. This copying detection is beneficial in application scenarios where some sources copy information from others. The main principle behind the copy detection is that if some sources make many common mistakes, they are not likely to be independent with each other. However, this principle becomes ineffective when some sources copy information from a good source. In BIB9664056 , the authors propose a method to detect direct copying relationship. They assume that a copier does not copy all the information from other sources and may provide some information by itself. In other words, the detected copying relationship is represented by a probability that a source copies the provided information from others. The authors apply Bayesian analysis to infer the existence and direction of copying relationship among sources. This copying detection procedure is tightly combined with truth discovery, and thus the detected copying relationship and the discovered truths are iteratively updated. On the other hand, BIB6088189 alleviates the source dependency problem by revealing the latent group structure among sources, and aggregates the information at the group level. This can reduce the risk of overusing the information from the dependent sources, especially when these sources are unreliable. Compared with the above work that the copying relationship is detected from snapshots of data, BIB11665305 detects copying relationship from dynamic data, where the provided information from sources are changing. The authors apply Hidden Markov Model (HMM) to detect copying relationship given the update history of sources, and the outputs are the evolving copying relationship and the evolving true values. To evaluate the quality of sources, instead of simply considering their accuracy, more metrics are adopted for the dynamic data, such as coverage (how many values in the history a source covers), exactness (how many updates conform to the reality), and freshness (how quickly a source captures a new value). The copying relationship detection is performed by considering the source quality and the update behaviors among sources simultaneously. Similar to BIB9664056 , both the copying relationship and true values are inferred in an iterative procedure. However, there may be other complex copying relationships rather than direct copying, such as co-copying (i.e., multiple sources copy from one source), and transitive copying (i.e., a source may copy from other sources transitively). To detect such global copying relationship, BIB14321955 extends the idea of BIB9664056 and BIB11665305 : By considering both the completeness and accuracy of sources, the existence and direction of direct copying relationship are detected. Then based on these detected direct copying relationship, Bayesian analysis is performed to detect global copying relationship. The main principle behind the copy detection is that copiers make the same mistakes with sources they copy from, which is limited in characterizing the relations among sources. In BIB1823753 , the authors consider different correlations between sources which are more general than copying. Sources may have positive correlations, such as copying information from each other or sharing similar rules for information extractors; sources may also have negative correlations, such as providing data from complementary domains or focusing on different fields of information. Intuitively, the observations from positively correlated sources should not increase the belief that they are true, and the observations supported by only a few negatively correlated sources should not decrease the belief that they are true. The proposed method models correlations among sources with joint precision and joint recall, and Bayesian analysis is preformed to infer the probability of an observation to be true. Approximation methods are also provided as the computation complexity of estimating joint precision and recall is exponential. In above work, source correlations are inferred from data. While in practice, such source correlation information might be available as extra input. For example, the authors in BIB1080095 fuse the observations from multiple Twitter users by estimating the reliability of each individual user (source). In this application scenario, Twitter users may report observations made by others as their own, which is a form of source copying phenomenon. Instead of estimating the correlations among users, the follower-followee graph and retweeting behaviors in Twitter capture the correlations among users, and such extra information can be adopted to improve the results of truth discovery algorithms.