Most of the truth discovery methods assume that objects are independent. In practice, objects may have relations and could affect each other. For example, "the birth year of a person" has strong relation with "the age of a person", and "A is the father of B" indicates that "B is the son of A". Such prior knowledge or common sense about object relations could improve the results of truth discovery. In BIB9627105 , prior knowledge is translated into propositional constraints that are integrated into each round of truth discovery process. Specifically, each fact (an object and its corresponding value) is represented as a [0, 1] variable, and then according to the prior knowledge, related facts are combined into propositional constraints. A cost function is defined as the difference between the original results solely based on truth discovery and new results which satisfy the propositional constraints. By minimizing the cost, the probability of each fact to be true is "corrected" according to prior knowledge during each iteration. To guarantee the feasibility of this optimization problem, for each object, an augmented "unknown" answer is incorporated to relax the constraints and avoid the possible conflicts among constraints. In BIB16617195 , information extraction and truth discovery methods are combined to solve Slot Filling Validation task which aims to determine the credibility of the output information extracted by different systems from different corpora. The authors construct a Multi-dimensional Truth-Finding Model (MTM) which is a heterogeneous network including systems, corpora, extracted information, and weight matrices between them. Similar to the iterative truth discovery process, the credibility of the extracted information is propagated within the network to infer the reliabilities of both systems and corpora, and in turn, the reliabilities of systems and corpora are used to refine the credibility of the extracted information. To initialize the credibility, the authors consider the dependent relationship among different slots (object) by constructing a knowledge graph. For example, "Adam is a child of Mary" should have high credibility if we already believe that "Bob is a child of Mary" and "Adam is a sibling of Bob". Temporal and spatial relations also exist among objects. For example, today's high temperature for New York City has correlation with the one of yesterday, and the nearby segments of roads may have correlated traffic conditions. Such temporal and spatial relations among objects can be captured to benefit truth discovery procedure. Recently,  and BIB14054006 model the temporal relations among evolving objects on categorical data and continuous data respectively, while BIB14263057 and BIB18514801 can handle both temporal and spatial relations on categorical data and continuous data respectively. Further, BIB18514801 demonstrates that capturing the relations among objects can greatly improve the performance of truth discovery as objects may receive insufficient observations in many real-world applications.