In the era of information explosion, data have been woven into every aspect of our lives, and we are continuously generating data through a variety of channels, such as social networks, blogs, discussion forums, crowdsourcing platforms, etc. These data are analyzed at both individual and population levels, by business for aggregating opinions and recommending products, by governments for decision making and security check, and by researchers for discovering new knowledge. In these scenarios, data, even describing the same object or event, can come from a variety of sources. However, the collected information about the same object may conflict with each other due to errors, missing records, typos, out-of-date data, etc. For example, the top search results returned by Google for the query "the height of Mount Everest" include "29, 035 feet", "29, 002 feet" and "29, 029 feet". Among these pieces of noisy information, which one is more trustworthy, or represents the true fact? In this and many more similar problems, it is essential to aggregate noisy information about the same set of objects or events collected from various sources to get true facts. One straightforward approach to eliminate conflicts among multi-source data is to conduct majority voting or averaging. The biggest shortcoming of such voting/averaging approaches is that they assume all the sources are equally reliable. Unfortunately, this assumption may not hold in most cases. Consider the aforementioned "Mount Everest" example: Using majority voting, the result "29, 035 feet", which has the highest number of occurrences, will be regarded as the truth. However, in the search results, the information "29, 029 feet" from Wikipedia is the truth. This example reveals that information quality varies a lot among different sources, and the accuracy of aggregated results can be improved by capturing the reliabilities of sources. The challenge is that source reliability is usually unknown a priori in practice and has to be inferred from the data. In the light of this challenge, the topic of truth discovery [15, 22, 24, 29-32, 46, 48, 74, 77, 78] has gained increasing popularity recently due to its ability to estimate source reliability degrees and infer true information. As truth discovery methods usually work without any supervision, the source reliability can only be inferred based on the data. Thus in existing work, the source reliability estimation and truth finding steps are tightly combined through the following principle: The sources that provide true information more often will be assigned higher reliability degrees, and the information that is supported by reliable sources will be regarded as truths. With this general principle, truth discovery approaches have been proposed to fit various scenarios, and they make different assumptions about input data, source relations, identified truths, etc. Due to this diversity, it may not be easy for people to compare these approaches and choose an appropriate one for their tasks. In this survey paper, we give a comprehensive overview of truth discovery approaches, summarize them from different aspects, and discuss the key challenges in truth discovery. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive survey on truth discovery. We hope that this survey paper can provide a useful resource about truth discovery, help people advance its frontiers, and give some guidelines to apply truth discovery in real-world tasks. Truth discovery plays a prominent part in information age. On one hand we need accurate information more than ever, but on the other hand inconsistent information is inevitable due to the "variety" feature of big data. The development of truth discovery can benefit many applications in different fields where critical decisions have to be made based on the reliable information extracted from diverse sources. Examples include healthcare BIB9924032 , crowd/social sensing  BIB16785754 BIB15132210 BIB10244021 BIB8350875 BIB14263057 , crowdsourcing BIB6502029 BIB13803906 BIB2332622 , informa-tion extraction BIB14122041 BIB16617195 , knowledge graph construction BIB4557963 BIB6749594 and so on. These and other applications demonstrate the broader impact of truth discovery on multi-source information integration. The rest of this survey is organized as follows: In the next section, we first formally define the truth discovery task. Then the general principle of truth discovery is illustrated through a concrete example, and three popular ways to capture this principle are presented. After that, in Section 3, components of truth discovery are examined from five aspects, which cover most of the truth discovery scenarios considered in the literature. Under these aspects, representative truth discovery approaches are compared in Section 4. We further discuss some future directions of truth discovery research in Section 5 and introduce several applications in Section 6. In Section 7, we briefly mention some related areas of truth discovery. Finally, this survey is concluded in Section 8.