In the previous section, we summarize various truth discovery methods from five aspects, namely, input data, source reliability, object, claimed value, and the output. Now, we briefly describe several representative truth discovery methods, and compare them under different features (Tables 2  and 3) . By providing such a comparison, we hope to give some guidelines so that users and developers can choose an appropriate truth discovery method and apply it to the specific application scenarios. Due to space limitation, here we only describe each truth discovery algorithm briefly. For more details about these methods, the readers may refer to the reference papers. • TruthFinder BIB311285 : In TruthFinder, Bayesian analysis is adopted to iteratively estimate source reliabilities and identify truths. The authors also propose the source consistency assumption and the concept of "implication", which are widely adopted in other truth discovery methods. • AccuSim BIB9664056 BIB3133027 : AccuSim also applies Bayesian analysis. In order to capture the similarity of claimed values, the implication function is adopted. • AccuCopy BIB9664056 BIB3133027 : This method improves AccuSim, and considers the copying relations among sources. The proposed method reduces the weight of a source if it is detected as a copier of other sources. • 2-Estimates BIB1761360 : In this approach, the single truth assumption is explored. By assuming that "there is one and only one true value for each object", this approach adopts complementary vote. • 3-Estimates BIB1761360 : 3-Estimates augments 2-Estimates by considering the difficulty of getting the truth for each object. • Investment BIB9627105 : In this approach, a source uniformly "invests" its reliability among its claimed values, and the confidence of a claimed value grows according to a non-linear function defined on the sum of invested reliabilities from its providers. Then the sources collect credits back from the confidence of their claimed values. • SSTF BIB2058597 : In this semi-supervised truth discovery approach, a small set of labeled truths are incorporated to guide the source reliability estimation. Meanwhile, both mutual exclusivity and mutual support are adopted to capture the relations among claimed values. • LTM BIB8837716 : LTM is a probabilistic graphical model which considers two types of errors under the scenarios of multiple truths: false positive and false negative. This enables LTM to break source reliability into two parameters, one for false positive error and the other for false negative error. • GTM  : GTM is a Bayesian probabilistic approach especially designed for solving truth discovery problems on continuous data.