We often expect better performance of truth discovery when more data sources are involved in. However, nothing comes for free in practice -both economic and computational costs should be taken into consideration when applying truth discovery. Moreover, BIB1255534 shows that the incorporation of bad sources may even hurt the performance of truth discovery. In order to solve these problems, BIB1255534 BIB7923830 BIB367128 provide methods to wisely select sources for truth discovery constrained by the cost and output quality. In BIB367128 , the authors propose a method to select sources under different cost constraints, in which the task is formulated as an optimization problem. Their Integrating Dependent Sources (IDS) system can return an optimal subset of sources to query, and the selection guarantees that the cost constraints are satisfied. The greedy and randomized approximation algorithms proposed for this problem run in polynomial time with provable quality guarantees. In BIB1255534 , source selection is performed on static data sources. The authors first provide a dynamic programming algorithm to infer the accuracy of integrating any arbitrary subset of sources. Then a randomized greedy algorithm is adopted to select the optimal subset of sources by incorporating a source in integration only if the gain of accuracy exceeds the corresponding cost. While in BIB7923830 , source selection is performed on dynamic data sources whose contents are updated over time. A greedy algorithm is developed to output near-optimal source selection and the optimal frequencies to acquire sources for update-to-date information. More interestingly, BIB13803906 claims that a source is useless only when it guesses answers randomly. Even very bad sources can make positive contributions if truth discovery approach assigns negative weights to them. In other words, if a bad source provides a piece of information, we can infer that this information might be wrong with high probability.