Although various methods have been proposed, for truth discovery task, there are still many important problems to explore. Here we discuss some future directions of truth discovery. • Unstructured data. For most of the truth discovery approaches, they assume that the inputs are available as structured data. Nowadays, more and more applications of truth discovery are dealing with unstructured data such as text. In BIB6749594 BIB16617195 , the inaccurate information can come from both text corpora and information extractors, i.e., two layers of sources. If the object difficulty is also considered, the penalty of wrong information should be distributed to three factors, corpora, extractors, and objects. This brings new challenges to source weight estimation. Further, the extracted inputs from unstructured data are much more noisy and also bring new information (uncertainty BIB9627105 , evidence BIB16617195 , etc.) to be taken into consideration. • Object relations. For most of the truth discovery approaches, they assume that objects are independent with each other. However, more and more application scenarios reveal the importance of capturing the relations among objects. In knowledge graph BIB4557963 , objects can be related in various ways, such as "the birth year of a person" and "the age of a person". Although some efforts BIB18514801 BIB9627105 BIB14263057 have been made to consider the object relations, this problem needs more explorations. A more difficult question is to automatically discover relations among objects. Due to the large scale of the involved objects, it is impossible to manually detect and encode such relations. • Source reliability initialization. Some potential disadvantages are observed on truth discovery with uniform weight initialization: (1) At the beginning of the iterative solutions, the behavior of truth discovery is identical to voting/averaging, and thus truth discovery randomly chooses outputs for tie cases. If the ways of breaking ties are different, the estimated source weights may be quite different. (2) The uniform weight initialization leads to the phenomenon that the aggregated results of truth discovery methods rely on the majority to a certain extent. Nowadays, truth discovery has been applied in more difficult tasks such as slot filling BIB16617195 , in which the majority of sources provide inaccurate information. Thus the performance of truth discovery may suffer from the uniform weight initialization on these tasks. These disadvantages motivate people to investigate new ways to initialize the source reliability. • Model selection. Given various truth discovery methods, how to select an appropriate one to apply to some specific tasks? Although we compare them from different aspects and give some guidelines in previous section, it is still a difficult task. Is it possible to apply various truth discovery methods together, and then combine the outputs of various methods as final output? This ensemble approach might be a possible solution to tackle the model selection challenge. • Theoretical analysis. Will the truth discovery methods promise convergence? If so, what is the rate of convergence and is it possible to bound the errors of converged results? These and many more questions need further exploration. Another interesting task is to explore the relations or even the equivalence among various truth discovery approaches. In Section 2, we show some evidences that different ways to capture the general principle are equivalent. We may better understand the relations among different truth discovery methods by exploring the equivalence among them. • Efficiency. Most of the existing truth discovery methods adopt iterative procedure to estimate source reliabilities and compute truths. This might be inefficient in practice, especially when we apply truth discovery on large-scale datasets. Some attentions have been given to the efficiency issue in streaming data scenarios BIB11665305 BIB14054006 BIB629480 BIB13568856 . However, more efforts are needed to improve the efficiency of truth discovery for general cases. • Performance evaluation. In the current research work about truth discovery, the groundtruth information is assumed to be available for the purpose of per-formance evaluation. Unfortunately, in practice, we cannot make this assumption. For example, in the task of knowledge graph construction BIB4557963 , the number of involved objects is huge and it is impossible to have the groundtruths for performance validation. It requires expensive human efforts to get even a small set of labeled groundtruths. How to evaluate the performance of various truth discovery methods when the groundtruth information is missing? This becomes a big challenge for the truth discovery applications.