The interpretations of truth discovery results are important for both end-users ("why should I trust the results") and developers ("how to improve the results"). However, most of the truth discovery methods output opaque information. For example, the output could be that the reliability degree of a source is 6, or the support from sources for a claimed value is 3.7. These intermediate parameters are not interpretable for end-users and developers, and we need to construct some intuitive explanations based on the raw outputs. In BIB14376137 , source reliability degree is modeled as the probability of a source asserting the truth, which is more meaningful for human interpretation. In addition, they extend the source reliability definition by considering the difference between knowing the truths and telling the truths. Specifically, in their SimpleLCA model, the reliability is considered as the probability of a source asserting the truths, while in GuessLCA model the reliability is the probability of a source both knowing and asserting the truths, and in MistakeLCA and LieLCA models, the reliability means the probability of a source intending to tell the truths. In BIB38891 , the authors propose methods to automatically generate both snapshot explanation and comprehensive explanation for truth discovery. These explanations could be used to explain the results of truth discovery derived from iterative computing procedure. Snapshot explanation provides endusers a high-level understanding of the results by gathering all the positive and negative explanations for a specific decision over alternative choices. It lists all the evidences that support the decision as positive explanations and all the evidences which are against the decision as negative ones. In order to make the explanation more concise, categorization and aggregation are conducted so that similar evidences will not appear repeatedly. In addition, they perform evidence list shortening to remove evidence with less importance, and thus human-interpretable explanations can be derived. Compared with snapshot explanation, comprehensive explanation constructs a directed acyclic graph (DAG) to provide an in-depth explanation of the results. The DAG is constructed by tracing the decisions from the last round of iteration all the way to the first iteration where each node represents a decision and the children represent evidences. After the DAG construction, an explanation shortening is performed to eliminate those rounds where no decisions are reached to derive a concise explanation.