In this section, we discuss the general principle adopted by truth discovery approaches, and then describe three popular ways to model it in practice. After comparing these three ways, a general truth discovery procedure is given. As mentioned in Section 1, the most important feature of truth discovery is its ability to estimate source reliabilities. To identify the trustworthy information (truths), weighted aggregation of the multi-source data is performed based on the estimated source reliabilities. As both source reliabilities and truths are unknown, the general principle of truth discovery works as follows: If a source provides trustworthy information frequently, it will be assigned a high reliability; meanwhile, if one piece of information is supported by sources with high reliabilities, it will have big chance to be selected as truth. To better illustrate this principle, consider the example in Table 1 . There are three sources providing the birthplace information of six politicians (objects), and the goal is to infer the true birthplace for each politician based on the conflicting multi-source information. The last two rows in Table 1 show the identified birthplaces by majority voting and truth discovery respectively. By comparing the results given by majority voting and truth discovery in Table 1 , we can see that truth discovery methods outperform majority voting in the following cases: (1) If a tie case is observed in the information provided by sources for an object, majority voting can only randomly select one value to break the tie because each candidate value receives equal votes. However, truth discovery methods are able to distinguish sources by estimating their reliability degrees. Therefore, they can easily break the tie and output the value obtained by weighted aggregation. In this running example, Mahatma Gandhi represents a tie case. (2) More importantly, truth discovery approaches are able to output a minority value as the aggregated result. Let's take a close look at Barack Obama in Table 1 . The final aggregated result given by truth discovery is "Hawaii", which is a minority value provided by only Source 2 among these three sources. If most sources are unreliable and they provide the same incorrect information (consider the "Mount Everest" example in Section 1), majority voting has no chance to select the correct value as it is claimed by minority. In contrast, truth discovery can distinguish reliable and unreliable sources by inferring their reliability degrees, so it is able to derive the correct information by conducting weighted aggregation. As a result, truth discovery approaches are labeled as the methods that can discover "the wisdom of minority" BIB13803906 BIB16617195 . Next, we discuss three popular ways to incorporate this general principle in truth discovery methods.