From a broader view, there are some research topics in the area of aggregation and fusion that are relevant to truth discovery. These research topics include multi-view learning/clustering, rank aggregation, sensor data fusion, meta analysis, and ensemble learning. However, the problem settings of these research topics are different from that of truth discovery. Specifically, in multi-view learning/clustering BIB14079018 BIB207228399  , the input is data of various feature sets (views) and the task is to conduct classification or clustering on multiple views jointly. Rank aggregation BIB8393813 BIB60884227 has a different input/output space with truth discovery as it focuses on the aggregation of ranking functions. In sensor data fusion BIB110312126 BIB59705797 , the source reliability is not considered and usually all the sources are treated indistinguishably. In meta analysis BIB1086172  , different lab studies are combined via weighted aggregation, but the source weight is derived mostly based on the size of the sample used in each lab study. In ensemble learning BIB19640731  , the weights of base models are inferred through supervised training whereas truth discovery is unsupervised. Compared with these research topics, truth discovery methods aggregate data collected from various sources on the same set of features on the same set of objects, and the goal of truth discovery is to resolve the conflicts among multiple sources by automatically estimating source reliability based on multi-source data only. Another relevant research area is information trustworthiness analysis. First, in some trustworthiness scoring systems, various methods have been developed for evaluating the reputation or trustworthiness of users, accounts or nodes in the context of social media platforms BIB13843628 BIB11018118 , or sensor networks  BIB1928064 . However, these systems focus on the computation of trustworthiness or reliability degrees by considering the content and/or links among sources. Second, in trust-enhanced recommendation systems BIB5184220  , the recommendation for one user on one item can be computed by a weighted combination of ratings from other users on this item, where weights incorporate trust between users. In such systems, trust and recommendation are derived separately from different types of data -Trust is derived based on users' provided trust values about others or the recommendation history information, while recommendation is conducted based on current user-item ratings and the derived trust. Compared with these studies, truth discovery tightly combines the process of source reliability estimation and truth computation to discover both of them from multisource data, and source reliability is usually defined as the probability of a source giving true claims.