In the general principle of truth discovery, the truth computation and source reliability estimation depend on each other. Thus some truth discovery methods BIB9664056 BIB1761360 BIB9627105 BIB311285 are designed as iterative procedures, in which the truth computation step and source weight estimation step are iteratively conducted until convergence. In the truth computation step, sources' weights are as- BIB9627105 , the sources uniformly "invest" their reliabilities among their claimed values, and the truths are identified by weighted voting. To be more specific, each candidate value v receives the votes from sources in the following way: where Sv is the set of sources that provide this candidate value, and |Vs| is the number of claims made by source s. As the truths are identified by ranking the received votes, the final results {v * o }o∈O rely more on the sources with high weights. This follows the principle that the information from reliable sources will be counted more in the aggregation. In the source weight estimation step, source weights are estimated based on the current identified truths. Let's still take Investment for example. In truth computation step, the sources invest their reliabilities among claimed values, and now, in source weight computation step, they collect credits back from the identified truths as follows: That is, each source gets the proportional credits back from all its claimed values. As the received votes of values grow according to a non-linear function (Eq. (1)), the trustworthy information will have higher votes and contributes more to the source weight estimation. Thus the sources that provide trustworthy information more often will get more credits back and have higher weights.