• LCA BIB14376137 : In LCA approach, source reliability is modeled by a set of latent parameters, which can give more informative source reliabilities to end-users. • Apollo-social BIB1080095 : Apollo-social fuses the information from users on social media platforms such as Twitter. In social network, a claim made by a user can either be originally published by himself or be re-tweeted from other users. Apollo-social models this phenomenon as source dependencies and incorporates such dependency information into the truth discovery procedure. • CRH BIB3038467 : CRH is a framework that deals with the heterogeneity of data. In this framework, different types of distance functions can be plugged in to capture the characteristics of different data types, and the estimation of source reliability is jointly performed across all the data types together. • CATD BIB14466142 : CATD is motivated by the phenomenon that many sources only provide very few observations. It is not reasonable to give a point estimator for source reliability. Thus in this confidence-aware truth discovery approach, the authors derive the confidence interval for the source reliability estimation. We compare these truth discovery approaches in Tables 2  and 3 . Here we summarize them under different features as follows: • Input data: (1) Most of truth discovery methods can handle categorical data. Although GTM and CATD are designed for continuous data, it is feasible to encode the categorical data into probabilistic vectors BIB6502029 . (2) TruthFinder, AccuSim and AccuCopy can handle continuous data by incorporating the implication function, and SSTF captures the characteristic of con-tinuous data by mutual support. GTM, CRH and CATD are particularly designed for continuous data. (3) Besides CRH that is proposed for heterogeneous data, SSTF can also deal with categorical and continuous data simultaneously. (4) Among these truth discovery methods, only SSTF is proposed to work in semi-supervised setting. However, in practice, most truth discovery methods can be modified to take advantage of labeled truths. One possible solution is to replace some aggregated results in each iteration by corresponding labeled truths, which can thus guide the source reliability estimation. • Source reliability: (1) There is a series of work about source dependency analysis BIB14321955 BIB9664056 BIB11665305 BIB1823753 BIB367128 , and here we only list the AccuCopy algorithm and Apollo-social due to space limitation. (2) LTM, Regular EM, LCA and CATD enrich the meaning of source reliability from different aspects. • Object: Among the discussed truth discovery methods, 3-Estimates is the only one that takes into account the object difficulty. Investment and PooledInvestment approaches can incorporate the relations among objects. More efforts are needed to develop truth discovery methods that consider the advanced features about objects. • Claimed value: Several truth discovery approaches BIB9664056 BIB1761360 BIB3133027 BIB2058597 adopt the concept of complementary vote to strengthen the belief in single truth assumption. • Output: LTM is proposed to handle the multiple truth scenarios. Investment and PooledInvestment are augmented with "unknown" truths. Note that it is possible to modify some truth discovery methods, for example, LTM, to consider the unknown truths by adding one more candidate value "unknown" for each object.