Nowadays, truth discovery methods have been successfully applied in many real-world applications. • Healthcare. In online health communities, people post reviews about various drugs, and this usergenerated information is valuable for both patients and physicians. However, the quality of such information is a big issue to address. In BIB9924032 , the authors adopt the idea of truth discovery to automatically find reliable users and identify trustworthy user-generated medical statements. • Crowd/social sensing. Thanks to the explosive growth of online social networks, users can provide observations about physical world for various crowd/social sensing tasks, such as gas shortage report after a disaster, or real-time information summarization of an evolving event. For these participatory crowd/social sensing tasks, users' information may be unreliable. Recently, a series of approaches  BIB16785754 BIB10244021 BIB184737 BIB8350875 BIB14263057  have adopted truth discovery to improve the aggregation quality of such noisy sensing data. • Crowdsourcing aggregation. Crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk [1] provide a cost-efficient way to solicit labels from crowd workers. However, workers' quality are quite diverse, which brings the core task of inferring true labels from the labeling efforts of multiple workers BIB6502029 BIB45813168 BIB13803906 BIB14726351 BIB279332 BIB16167284 BIB6267415 BIB16484321 BIB2332622  . Thus crowdsourcing aggregation approaches focus on learning true labels or answers to certain questions. The main difference between crowdsourcing aggregation and truth discovery is that the former is an active procedure (one can control what and how much data to be generated by workers) while the latter is a passive procedure (one can only choose from available data sources). • Information extraction. For information extraction tasks, such as slot filling BIB16617195 and entity profiling BIB14122041 , related data can be collected from various corpora and multiple extractors can be applied to extract desired information. The outputs of different extractors can be conflicting, and thus truth discovery has been incorporated to resolve these conflicts. • Knowledge base. Several knowledge bases, such as Google Knowledge Graph [3], Freebase [2] and YAGO [4], have been constructed, but they are still far from complete. Truth discovery is a good strategy to automatically identify trustworthy information from the Internet. Existing work BIB4557963 BIB6749594 has demonstrated the advantages of truth discovery on this challenging task. Meanwhile, the source reliabilities estimated by truth discovery can be used to access the quality of webpages BIB739365 . Truth discovery is important to big data and social media analysis where noisy information is inevitable. Besides the above applications, truth discovery has great potentials to benefit more applications, such as aggregating GPS data from crowds for traffic control, distilling news from social media, and grading homework automatically for massive open online courses.