Similar to subsection III-C, training can be made more effective by assigning weights to instances according to their estimated noisiness level. This has an effect of emphasizing cleaner instances for better update on model weights. Simplest approach would be, in case of availability of both clean and noisy data, weighting clean data more  . However, better performance can be achieved with more complex algorithms and clean data is not always reachable. Weighting factor for instances proposed in BIB11777930 , depends on conditional distribution of noisy samples P D (Ỹ |X) and noise rate. While P D (Ỹ |X) can directly be estimated by trained classifier on data, estimating noise rate is challenging. Assuming that there exists clean samples in dataset, noise rate is upper-bounded by P D (Ỹ |X) and it is estimated by minimizing P D (Ỹ |X) over X ∈ X 1 , ..., X n . Same methodology is extended to multi-class case in BIB21685171 with additional ways to estimate noise rate. BIB3039286 trains two separate networks to tackle with labeler bias: visual presence and relevance classifiers. While visual presence classifier tries to learn if objects exist in the data sample, relevance classifier attains the relevance of the class for the given instance. If relevance is low, in case of noise, classifier can still make predictions of true class and will not be penalized much for it. In BIB4417115 , feature extractor network is used to extract features from both reference set and queried sample. Similarity loss is defined to measure relevance of the image to its noisy label, which is then used to weight importance of the particular sample to learning. BIB8606632 takes a pre-trained network on a different domain and fine tunes it for the noisy labeled dataset. Groups of image features are formed and group sparsity regularization is imposed so that mode is forced to choose relative features and therefore weights more the reliable images. In BIB4321928 , meta learning paradigm is used to determine the weighting factor. In each iteration, gradient descent step on given mini-batch for weighting factor is performed, so that it minimizes the loss on noise-free data. Weighting factor is validated in each iteration, which is argued to have regularizer effect on the model. Open-set noisy labels are considered in BIB4564331 . Siamese network is trained to detect noisy labels by learning discriminative features to apart clean and noisy data. Noisy samples are iteratively detected and pulled from clean samples. In each iteration weighting factor is recalculated and classifier is updated. BIB59158837 also iteratively separates noisy samples and clean samples. On top of that, not to miss valuable information from minority and hard samples, noisy data is weighted according to their noisiness level which is estimated by pLOF BIB14401236 . BIB166227922 introduces abstention, which gives option to abstain samples, depending on their crossentropy error, with an abstention penalty. Therefore network learns to abstain confusing samples during learning which helps to learn underlying structure of noise. BIB52161569 proposes to weight mini-batches according to similarity between gradients of training batch and validation batch, in order to improve generalization and prevent negative effects due to mislabeled instances. BIB85500272 uses θ values of samples in θ-distribution to calculate their probability of being clean and use this information to weight clean samples more in training. BIB21725595 estimates the quality of data samples by checking consistency between generated and target distributions. This information is then used for loss correction for noisy labeled data.