With the recent advancements of deep neural networks, necessity of hand designed features for computer vision are mostly eliminated. Instead, these features are learned autonomously via machine learning techniques. Even though these systems are able to learn complex functions on their own, there still remains many hand designed parameters such as network architecture, hyper-parameters, optimization algorithm and so on. Meta learning aims to eliminate these necessities by learning not just the required complex function for the task, but also learning the learning itself BIB2928017 , BIB6719686 . Designing a task beyond classical supervised learning in meta learning fashion has been used to deal with label noise as well. A meta task is defined as predicting most suitable method, among family of methods, for a given noisy dataset in BIB29352928 . Pumpout [108] presents a meta objective as recovering the damage done by noisy samples by erasing their effect on model via scaled gradient ascent. Model-agnostic metalearning (MAML) BIB6719686 seeks for weight initialization which can easily be fine-tuned. Similar approach is used in BIB55751842 for noisy labels, which aims to find noise-tolerant model parameters that are less prone to noise under teacher-student training framework  ,  . Training consists of two steps: 1) in meta-train step synthetic noisy data is fed to students to update their parameters 2) in meta-test step consistency loss between teacher and all students are applied. Finally parameters are updated such that consistency loss is minimized and teacher network parameters are set as the exponential moving average of the student networks. In case of available clean data, a meta objective can be defined to utilize these information. Approach used in BIB14659675 is to train a teacher network in a clean dataset and transfer its knowledge to student network for the purpose of guiding train process in the presence of mislabeled data. They used distillation technique proposed in BIB7200347 for controlled transfer of knowledge from teacher to student. Similar methodology of using distillation together with label correction in human pose estimation task is implemented in BIB53209366 . In BIB3672345 , BIB3091496 target network is trained on excessive noisy data and confidence network is trained on reference set. Inspiring from BIB2928017 , confidence network's task is to control the magnitude of gradient updates to the target network so that noisy labels are not resulting in updating gradients.