As explained in subsection II-C, there can be several reasons for multi-labeled datasets to exist. Each labeler may have different level of expertise and their labels may commonly contradict with each other. This is a common case in crowdsourced data  - BIB14888472 or datasets which requires high level of expertise such as medical imaging BIB3920589 . Therefore, modeling and using labeler characteristic can significantly increase performance BIB4545336 . In this setup there are two unknowns namely; labeler noise transition matrix and ground truth labels. One can estimate both with EM algorithm BIB3300937 , BIB14726351 , BIB11284353 . BIB60440658 adds a regularizer to loss function which is the sum of traces of annotator confusion matrices, arguing that this additional term helps approximating true confusion matrices under some mild conditions. In BIB2332622 , also difficulty of images are estimated for better evaluation of labeler accuracy. Human annotators and computer vision system are used mutually in BIB34506824 , where consistency among predictions of these two components are used to evaluate the reliability of labelers. BIB14888659 deals with the noise when labeler omits a tag in the image. Therefore, instead of confusion matrix of labelers, omitting probability variable is used, which is estimated together with true class using EM algorithm. Softmax layer is trained for each annotator in BIB4545336 and a final classifier to predict the true class of data depending on the outputs of labeler specific networks and features of data. This setup enables to model each labeler and their overall noise structure in separate networks. Similar approach is implemented in BIB19179988 , where crowd-layer is added to the end of network. Crowd-layer learns annotator specific mapping from output layer to noisy labels and adjusts gradients for each labeler in backpropagation.