A simple methodology to deal with noisy labels is to remove samples with suspicious labels or correct their noisy label to corresponding true class. This can be done in preprocessing stage of the training data, however such methods usually tackle the difficulty of distinguishing informative hard samples from those with noisy labels BIB6054025 . With superior classification abilities of deep neural networks, different methodologies to train label cleaning networks are proposed in literature. Unlike preprocessing of data, label cleaning models evaluated in this section are trained mutually with base classifier and their abilities keep improving during training. Methods under this category can be subdivided into two according to their need of reference set, label noise free subset of data, or not. 1) Using Reference Set: If there exists a clean subset of data, which has both noisy label and verified true label, network trained on this dataset can be used to relabel noisy labels until convergence BIB147704382 . In BIB5351802 , network trained on a clean dataset is fine tuned on noisy dataset for relabeling. Afterwards, network is again trained on relabeled data to re-sample dataset. In BIB164146 label cleaning network gets two inputs: extracted features of instances by the base classifier and corresponding noisy label. It is trained to predict true class depending on these inputs and therefore learn the noise structure. For noisy data, base classifier is supervised by the predictions of label cleaning network. BIB3481593 uses teacher to clean labels for student to fine tune its training. First, student is trained on noisy data. Then features are extracted from clean data via the student model and teacher learns the structure of noise depending on these extracted features. Afterwards, teacher predicts soft labels for noisy data and student is again trained on these soft labels for fine tuning. Ensemble of networks which are trained with different subset of dataset are used in BIB19228089 . If they all agree on the label it is changed to predicted label, otherwise label is set to a random label. Authors argue that setting it to random would make noise more uniformly random and less structured which results in less bias in the learned network. 2) Not Using Reference Set: Joint optimization framework for both training classifier and propagating noisy labels to cleaner labels is presented in BIB4544107 . Their work consists of two progressive steps 1) Fix labels and update classifier weights with stochastic gradient descent (SGD), 2) Fix network parameters and update labels as moving average of network predictions. Additional regularization terms are added to cost label cleaning network for preventing it attaining one class posterior to all classes and base network predicting it. The same framework is used in BIB83458813 with probabilistic end-toend fashion, so that label posteriors are approximated with the help of classification and compatibility loss instead of moving average of network predictions. BIB5019500 proposes a two level approach. In the first stage, with any chosen inference algorithm, ground truth of the labels are determined and data is divided into two subset as noisy and clean. In the second stage, ensemble of weak classifiers are trained on clean data to predict true labels of noisy data. After that, these two subsets of data are merged to create the final enhanced dataset. BIB199453105 constructs prototypes, that are able to represent deep feature distribution of the corresponding class, for each class. Then corrected label is found by checking similarity among the data sample and prototypes. Using corrected label and noisy label, the final classifier network is trained. Assuming that correctly labeled data account for majority, BIB52197739 proposes to randomly split dataset to labeled and unlabeled subgroups. Then, labels are propagated to unlabeled data using similarity index among instances. This procedure repeated to produce multiple labels per instance and then final label is set with majority voting. BIB1354303 deploys a confidence policy where labels are determined by either network output or given noisy labels. With increasing number of epochs, more confidence is given to the network output defending that it gets better at predicting labels during training. BIB81981674 formulates video anomaly detection as a classification with label noise problem and trains a graph convolutional label noise cleaning network depending on features and temporal consistency of video snippets.