A widely used approach to overcome label noise is to manipulate the input stream to the classifier. Guiding the network with choosing right instances to be trained on, can help classifier to find its way easier in the presence of noisy labels. Since these methods operate outside of the existing system, they are easier to attach to the existing system as an add-on. Four major approaches under this group are discussed in the following paragraphs. 1) Self Consistency: Next samples to be trained on can be chosen by checking the consistency of the label with the network prediction. In BIB2181703 , if both label and model prediction of the given sample are consistent, it is used in the training set. Otherwise, model has a right to disagree. Iteratively this provides better training data and better model. However, there is a risk of model being too skeptical and choosing labels in a delusional way, therefore consistency balance should be established. BIB203737303 uses consistency among label prediction in the current epoch and moving average of model predictions to evaluate if the given label is noisy or not. Then model is trained on clean samples on the next iteration. This procedure continues until convergence to the best estimator. In BIB9963515 graph-based approach is used, where relation among noisy labels and clean labels are extracted by a conditional random field (CRF). In BIB19306177 , with the help of a probabilistic classifier, training data divided into two subsets: confidently clean and noisy. Noise rates are estimated according to sizes of these subsets and less confident examples are removed from the clean subset. Finally, classifier is trained on pruned dataset. 2) Curriculum Learning: Curriculum learning (CL) BIB873046 , inspired from human cognition, proposes to start from easy samples and go through harder samples to guide training. This is also called self-paced learning BIB1977996 , when prior of sample hardness is not known and inferred from loss of current model on that sample. In noisy label framework clean labeled data can be accepted as easy task while noisily labeled data is harder task. Therefore the idea of CL can be transferred to label noise setup as starting from confidently clean instances and go through more likely to be noisier samples as the classifier gets better. Various screening loss functions are proposed in BIB51614388 to sort instances according to their noisiness level. Teacher-student approach is implemented in BIB51876228 , where the task of the teacher is to choose most probably to be clean samples for the student. Novelty in their approach is the non-predefined curriculum, so that teacher gets the outputs from student as an input to update its curriculum during training. Arguing that CL slows down the learning speed, since it focuses on easy samples, BIB20785832 suggests to choose uncertain samples, which are predicted incorrectly sometimes and correctly on others, in training. These samples assumed to be probably not noisy since noisy samples should be predicted incorrectly all the time. Two datasets is gathered in BIB5658192 namely: easy data and hard data. Classifier is first trained on easy data to extract similarity relationships among classes, then calculated similarity matrix is added as an extra layer on top of the model and hard samples are fed for fine tuning. Arguing that it is hard to optimize 0-1 loss, curriculum loss that chooses samples with low loss values for loss calculation, is proposed as an upper bound for 0-1 loss in BIB165163910 . In BIB51920640 , data is split into subgroups according to their complexities, which are extracted by network that is pre-trained on full dataset. Since less complex data groups expected to have more clean labels, training will start from less complex data and go through more complex instances as network gets better. In case of partial labels, BIB67856781 uses one network to find and estimate easy missing samples and other network to be trained on this corrected data. As network gets better, it can find harder labels, therefore providing a curriculum learning strategy. 3) Multiple Classifiers: Some works use two classifiers to help each other to choose next batch of data to train on. This is different than teacher student approach, since none of the networks is supervising the other on but they rather help each other out. This can provide robustness since networks can correct each other's noisy behavior due to their difference in feature domain. For this setup to work, initialization of the classifiers are important. They are most likely to be initialized with different subset of the data. If they are both the same, then there happens no update since they will both agree to disagree with labels. In BIB1430496 label is assumed to be noisy if both networks disagree with the given label and update on model weights happens only when the prediction of two networks conflicts. Paradigm of co-teaching is introduced in BIB52065462 , where two networks select next batch of data for each other. Next batch is chosen as the data batch which has small loss values according to pair network. It is claimed that using one network accumulates the noise related error whereas two networks filters noise error more successfully. Idea of co-teaching is further improved by iterating over data where two networks disagree BIB59316631 , to prevent two network converging each other with increasing number of epochs. Another work using coteaching, first trains two networks on a selected subset for a given number of epochs and then moves to full dataset BIB152282273 . 4) Active Learning: Getting whole dataset cleanly annotated can be expensive, so active learning methods can be used to label only the critical instances. BIB15080437 suggests to train network on a large noisy dataset, which is easily obtainable from the web. After the classifier is trained, instances that has too much inconsistency with the model predictions are sent to annotator for correction. This procedure is repeated until desired classification accuracy is obtained.