Recent advancement in deep learning has led to great improvements on many different domains, such as image classification BIB195908774 - BIB14124313 , object detection BIB1241368 - BIB2141740 , semantic segmentation BIB14554538 , BIB56507745 and others. Despite their impressive ability to generalize BIB3511978 ,  , it is shown that these powerful models are able to memorize complete random noise BIB6212000 . Various works are devoted to better explain this phenomenon  ,  , yet regularizing deep neural networks (DNNs), avoiding memorization, stays to be an important challenge. It gets even more crucial when there exists noise in data. Therefore, various methods are proposed in literature to effectively train deep networks in the presence of noise. There are two kinds of noise in literature, namely: feature and label noise BIB3331253 . Feature noise corresponds to corruption in the observed features of data, while label noise means the change of label from its true class. Even though both noise types may cause significant decrease in performance BIB6054025 , BIB17187125 , label noise is considered to be more harmful BIB3331253 and shown to deteriorate the performance of classification systems in a broad range of problems BIB3331253 , BIB7531746 -  . This is due to several factors; label is unique for each data while features are multiple and importance of each feature varies while label has always big impact BIB6054025 ,  . This work focuses on label noise, therefore noise and label noise is used synonymous throughout the article. Necessity of excessive amount of labeled data for supervised learning is a major drawback, since it requires an expensive dataset collection and labeling process. To overcome this issue, cheaper alternatives are emerged. For example, almost unlimited amount of data can be collected from web with the help of search engines or from social media. Similarly, labeling process can be crowdsourced with the help of systems like Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) 1 , Crowdflower 2 , which decrease the cost of labeling notably. Another widely used approach is to label data with automated systems. However, all these approaches led to a common problem; label noise. Beside these methods, label noise can occur even in the case of expert annotators. Labelers may lack necessary experience or data can be too complex to be correctly classified even for the experts. Moreover, label noise can also be introduced to data adversarially for data poisoning purposes BIB16687466 , BIB35426171 . Being a natural outcome of dataset collection and labeling, makes label noise robust algorithms an important topic for development of efficient computer vision systems. Supervised learning with label noise is an old phenomenon with three decades of history BIB29767720 . An extensive survey about relatively old machine learning techniques under label noise is available BIB6054025 , BIB17187125 , however no work is proposed to provide a comprehensive survey on classification methods centered around deep learning by label noise. This work specifically focuses to fill this absence. Even though deep networks are considered to be relatively robust to label noise BIB3511978 ,  , they have an immense capacity to overfit data BIB6212000 . Therefore, preventing DNNs to overfit noisy data is very important, especially for fail-safe applications, such as automated medical diagnosis systems. Considering the significant success of deep learning over its alternatives, it is a topic of interest and many works are conducted in literature. Throughout the paper these methods will be briefly explained and grouped to provide reader a clear overview of the literature. This paper is organized as follows. Section II explains several concepts that will be used throughout the paper. Proposed solutions in literature are categorized into two major groups and these methods are discussed in section III -section IV. Section V discusses commonly used datasets and how to add synthetic label noise. Finally, section VI concludes the paper.