There are several widely used methods to add synthetic label noise to the given dataset. Y-dependent and XY-dependent noise is considered in this section, since random noise can easily be added by changing labels randomly. All mentioned methods are for the case of single labeler. If one requires to create synthetic noise for multiple annotators, any of the given methods can be used multiple times with different parameters to mimic different labelers. 1) Y-Dependent Noise: Y-dependent noise can be represented with confusion-matrix, where the entry p ij represents the probability of flipping label of instance from class i to class j. Then samples from each class can be flipped to other classes with the given probabilities. Since confusion matrix consists of probabilities, it should be satisfied that p ij > 0 for ∀i, j and j=n j=0 p ij for ∀i where n is the number of classes. Uniform Noise: Confusion matrix is defined where probability of choosing any other class, rather than true class, is equally distributed. A predefined probability of mislabeling p can be defined and samples from each class is changed from its true class to any other classes with equal probability. Random Noise: Confusion matrix is defined where probability of choosing any other class, rather than true class, is randomly distributed. A stochastic probability of mislabeling p ij can be defined for each mislabeling probability from class i to j. Paired Noise: Any instance from a class can only be flipped to one other class with probability p. In this type of noise, sufficient condition for learning is p < %50, because otherwise pairwise mislabeled data takes the majority. Class Dependent Noise: Flip probabilities from class i to j is assigned according to similarity of classes. For example, in handwritten digit recognition task p 17 , which is probability of mislabeling '1' as '7', can be higher while p 15 is lower. These probabilities can be assigned by an human annotator or by the prediction probabilities of pre-trained network. 2) XY-Dependent Noise: Artificially creating this type of noise is more complicated than previous ones, since one needs to consider the feature vectors of each sample. Most obvious method is to use human annotator to choose samples, but this is both expensive and not scalable. One particular approach is to use pre-trained network, which is either directly training on given data  ,  or dataset from similar but different domain BIB4544107 , to extract decision boundaries . Differently, in case of the presence of surrounding texts for image, user defined texts can be used to extract mostly probable noisy label BIB3300937 .