As mentioned, label noise is a natural outcome of dataset collection process and can be seen in various domains, such as medical imaging BIB4545336 , BIB44113767 , BIB59158837 , semantic segmentation BIB3633787 - BIB119295965 , crowd-sourcing BIB16484321 , social network tagging BIB1601286 , financial analysis BIB12457267 and many more. This work focuses on the solutions to such problems, but it may be helpful to investigate the causes of label noise to better understand the phenomenon. Firstly, with the availability of gigantic amount of data on web and social media, it is a great interest of computer vision community to make use of that BIB18331139 - BIB15080437 . However labels of these data are coming from messy user tags or automated systems used by search engines. These processes of obtaining dataset are well known to result in noisy labels. Secondly, dataset can be labeled by multiple experts resulting in multi-labeled dataset. Each labeler has varying level of expertise and their opinions may commonly conflict with each other, which results in noisy label problem BIB3300937 . There are several reasons to get data labeled by more than one expert. Opinions of multiple labelers can be used to double check each others predictions for difficult datasets or crowd-sourcing platforms can be used to decrease the cost of labeling for big data; such as Amazon Mechanical Turk, Crowdflower and more. Despite its cheapness, labels obtained from non experts are commonly noisy with differentiating rate of error. Some labelers even can be a total spammer whose labels are random noise BIB3300937 . Thirdly, data can be too complex for even the experts in the field, e.g medical imaging. For example, to collect gold standard validation data for retinal images, annotations are gathered from 6-8 different experts BIB51974607 , BIB26657811 . This can be due to subjectiveness of the task for human experts or the lack of experience in annotator. Considering the fields where the true diagnosis is of crucial importance, overcoming this noise can be of great interest. Lastly, adversarial label noise can be inserted for the purpose of data poisoning to harm the learning procedure BIB16687466 , BIB35426171 .