Throughout this paper it is shown that label noise is an important obstacle to deal with, in order to achieve desirable performance from real world datasets. Besides its importance for supervised learning in practical applications, it is also an important step to collect dataset from web BIB8317437 , BIB2608922 , design networks that can learn from unlimited web data with no human supervision BIB2199862 - BIB5776303 . Furthermore, beside image classification classification, there are more fields where dealing with mislabeled instances is important, such as generative networks BIB53774782 , BIB53212997 , semantic segmentation BIB3633787 - BIB119295965 , sound classification BIB57572929 and more. All these factors make dealing with label noise an important step through self sustained learning systems. Methods in literature can be subdivided into two major groups: noise model based and noise model free methods. Methods in the first group aims to model the noise somehow and use this information to decrease the negative effect of noisy labels on learning. On the other hand, methods in the second group purposes to design more generic algorithms that would fade away the impact of noise. Commonly used techniques in past for machine learning, such as data cleansing in preprocessing stage seems to lose its charm in the era of deep learning due to its inability to differentiate hard informative samples from noisy samples. Instead, algorithms that iteratively clean data while training are emerged, which can be included in the family of noise model based algorithms. Also instead of cleaning label noise, breaking its structure is shown to be an effective method as well BIB52197739 . Practitioner may choose appropriate algorithm depending on constraints, such as label noise type, having reference set or not, size of the dataset, computation power required and more. It is seen that adding synthetic label noise is an important stage for testing algorithms with existing benchmark datasets without noisy labels. Mostly used method is to add random noise or y-dependent noise with predefined noise rates, however these approaches may not be realistic most of the time. Therefore, more generic framework to dilute given dataset can be a topic of interest. Moreover, works indicate that mislabeled instances may have an effect of regularizer which improves generalization and prevents overfitting BIB51920640 , BIB10842458 . Therefore polluting labels in a controlled way to improve robustness can be an interesting topic to be further researched. Even though an extensive amount of research is conducted for machine learning techniques BIB6054025 , deep learning by noisy labels is certainly an understudied problem. Considering its dramatic effect on DNNs BIB6212000 , there still are many open research topics in the field. For example, truly understanding the effects of label noise on deep networks can be a fruitful future research topic. As mentioned in  , it is believed first layers of CNNs extract features from data while last layers learn to interpret labels from these features. Understanding which part of network is highly effected from label noise may help to achieve transfer learning effectively. Alternatively, question of how to train in the existence of both attribute and label noise is an understudied problem with big potential on practical applications BIB147704382 . BIB201070534 shows noisy labels degrades the learning especially for hard samples. So instead of overfitting that may be the reason for performance degradation, which is an open question to be answered in future. Very small attention is given to the learning from noisy labeled dataset when there is a small amount of data. This can be a fruitful research direction considering its potential on fields where harvesting dataset is costly. For example, in medical imaging, collecting a cleanly annotated large dataset is not feasible most of the time BIB147704382 , due to its cost or privacy of the data. Effectively learning from small amount of noisy data with no ground truth can have significant effect on autonomous medical diagnosis systems. Even though some pioneer researches are available BIB4545336 , BIB44113767 , BIB59158837 , there are still much more to be explored.