A loss function is said to be noise robust if the classifier learned with noisy and noise-free data, both achieve the same classification accuracy BIB391854 . Algorithms under this section, aims to design loss function in such a way that the noise would not decrease the performance. However, it is shown that noise can badly affect the performance even for the robust loss functions BIB6054025 . In BIB391854 , it is shown that certain non-convex loss functions, such as 0-1 loss, has noise tolerance much more than commonly used convex losses. Extending this work BIB8774197 derives sufficient conditions for a loss function to be noise tolerant under the risk minimization for uniform and non-uniform noises. Their work shows that if a loss function is symmetric, meaning that sum of its components are equal to a constant and noise level is below a threshold, under uniform noise it is noise robust. In this content, they empirically show that none of the standard convex loss functions has noise robustness while 0-1 loss has, under given circumstances. However, 0-1 loss is non-convex and non-differentiable, therefore surrogate loss of 0-1 loss is proposed in BIB2833811 , which is still noise sensitive. Multi-class classification is considered in BIB6546734 and it is shown that mean absolute value of error (MAE) is inherently robust to label noise under same circumstances. IMAE, which is an improved version of MAE, is proposed in BIB209386409 , where gradients are scaled with an hyper-parameter to adjusts MAE's weighting variance. BIB29164161 argues that MAE provides much smaller learning rate than categorical cross entropy (CCE), therefore a new loss function is suggested which combines robustness of MAE and implicit weighting of CCE. With a tuning parameter, it can be made more similar to MAE or CCE. Symmetric cross entropy is used in BIB201070534 , arguing that symmetry provides noise robust boosting in learning hard samples. Given that mean operator is not significantly affected by the noise, work of BIB865549 showed that class of linear odd losses (LOLs) are robust to the label noise at some degree, such that difference between the risks of minimizers with noisy data and clean data are smaller than a predefined threshold. BIB6788443 shows that classification-calibrated loss functions are asymptotically robust to symmetric label noise. SGD method in general is analyzed under label noise in BIB14531849 and shown to be more robust than its counterparts. Given that noise prior is known BIB423350 provides two surrogate loss functions namely unbiased and weighted estimator of the loss function using the prior information about label noise. BIB9448393 considers asymmetric omission noise for binary classification case, where the task is to find road pixels from a satellite map image. Omission noise makes network less confident about its predictions, so they modified cross-entropy loss to penalize network less for making wrong but confident predictions since these labels are more likely to be noisy.