A detailed taxonomy of label noise is provided in BIB6054025 . In this work we will follow the same taxonomy with a little abuse of notation. Label noise can be affected by three factors: data features, true label of data and labeler characteristic. According to dependence of these factors, label noise can be categorized in three sub classes. Random noise is totally random and does not depend on neither instance features nor its true class. With a given probability p e label is changed from its true class. Y-dependent noise is independent of X but depends on Y . That means data from a particular class is more likely to be mislabeled. For example, in hand written digit recognition task, "3" and "8" much more likely to be confused with each other rather then "3" and "5". XY-dependent noise depends on both X and Y . As in the y-dependent case, objects from particular class may be more likely to be mislabeled. Moreover, chance of mislabeling may change according to data features. If an instance has similar features to another instance from another class it is more likely to be mislabeled. What is not considered here is the case of multi-labeled data, in which each instance has multiple labels given by different annotators. In that scenario, works shows that modeling the characteristic of each labeler and using this information during training, significantly boosts the performance BIB4545336 . Characteristic of labeler can be independent from both X and Y . For example in a crowd-sourced dataset, some labelers can be total spammers who label with a random selection BIB3300937 . The behavior of each labeler can be explained by one of the groups above. For example, a spammer can be categorized as random noise while a better labeler can be modeled by y-dependent or xy-dependent noise. Therefore characteristic of labeler is not introduced as an extra ingredient in these definitions.