There have been "islands of success" where big data are processed via AI capabilities to produce information to achieve critical operational goals (e.g., fraud detection). Accordingly, scientists and consumers anticipate enhancement across a  Learning from training data to predict the type of new unseen test examples by mapping them to known pre-defined labels. BIB368182 Making sense of data without sticking to specific tasks and supervisory signals. arXiv:2003.01200v2 [cs.CL] 4 Mar 2020 variety of applications. However, achieving this requires understanding of AI and its mechanisms and means (e.g., algorithms). Ted Greenwald, explaining AI to those who are not AI experts, comments: "Generally AI is anything a computer can do that formerly was considered a job for a human"  . An AI goal is to extend the capabilities of information technology (IT) from those to (1) generate, communicate, and store data, to also BIB368182 process data into the knowledge that decision makers and others need BIB55186354 . One reason is that the available data volume is increasing so rapidly that it is now impossible for people to process all available data. This leaves two choices: (1) much or even most existing data must be ignored or (2) AI must be developed to process the vast volumes of available data into the essential pieces of information that decision-makers and others can comprehend. Deep learning is a bridge between the massive amounts of data and AI. 1) Definitions: Deep learning refers to applying deep neural networks to massive amounts of data to learn a procedure aimed at handling a task. The task can range from simple classification to complex reasoning. In other words, deep learning is a set of mechanisms ideally capable of deriving an optimum solution to any problem given a sufficiently extensive and relevant input dataset. Loosely speaking, deep learning is detecting and analyzing important structures/features in the data aimed at formulating a solution to a given problem. Here, AI and deep learning meet. One version of the goal or ambition behind AI is enabling a machine to outperform what the human brain does. Deep learning is a means to this end. 2) Deep Learning Architectures: Numerous deep learning architectures have been developed in different research areas, e.g., in NLP applications employing recurrent neural networks (RNNs)  , convolutional neural networks (CNNs)  , and more recently, recursive neural networks BIB18690358 . We focus our discussion on a review of the essential models, explained in relevant seminal publications. Multi Layer Perceptron: A multilayer perceptron (MLP) has at least three layers (input, hidden, and output layers). A layer is simply a collection of neurons operating to transform information from the previous layer to the next layer. In the MLP architecture, the neurons in a layer do not communicate with each other. An MLP employs nonlinear activation functions. Every node in a layer connects to all nodes in the next layer, creating a fully connected network ( Fig. 1) . MLPs are the simplest type of Feed-Forward Neural Networks (FNNs). FNNs represent a general category of neural networks in which the connections between the nodes do not create any cycle, i.e., in a FNN there is no cycle of information flow. Convolutional Neural Networks: Convolutional neural networks (CNNs), whose architecture is inspired by the human visual cortex, are a subclass of feed-forward neural networks. CNNs are named after the underlying mathematical operation, convolution, which yields a measure of the interoperability of its input functions. Convolutional neural networks are usually employed in situations where data is or needs to be represented with a 2D or 3D data map. In the data map representation, the proximity of data points usually corresponds to their information correlation. In convolutional neural networks where the input is an image, the data map indicates that image pixels are highly correlated to their neighboring pixels. Consequently, the convolutional layers have 3 dimensions: width, height, and depth. That assumption possibly explains why the majority of research efforts dedicated to CNNs are conducted in the Computer Vision field BIB207763512 . A CNN takes an image represented as an array of numeric values. After performing specific mathematical operations, it represents the image in a new output space. This operation is also called feature extraction, and helps to capture and represent key image content. The extracted features can be used for further analysis, for different tasks. One example is image classification, which aims to categorize images according to some predefined classes. Other examples include determining which objects are present in an image and where they are located. See Fig. 2 . In the case of utilizing CNNs for NLP, the inputs are sentences or documents represented as matrices. Each row of the matrix is associated with a language element such as a word or a character. The majority of CNN architectures learn word or sentence representations in their training phase. A variety of CNN architectures were used in various classification tasks such as Sentiment Analysis and Topic Categorization  , BIB15874232 - BIB1689250 . CNNs were employed for Relation Extraction and Relation Classification as well BIB12873739 , BIB12585424 . Recurrent Neural Network: If we line up a sequence of FNNs and feed the output of each FNN as an input to the next one, a recurrent neural network (RNN) will be constructed. Like FNNs, layers in an RNN can be categorized into input, hidden, and output layers. In discrete time frames, sequences of input vectors are fed as the input, one vector at a time, e.g., after inputting each batch of vectors, conducting some operations and updating the network weights, the next input batch will be fed to the network. Thus, as shown in Fig. 3 , at each time step we make predictions and use parameters of the current hidden layer as input to the next time step. Hidden layers in recurrent neural networks can carry information from the past, in other words, memory. This characteristic makes them specifically useful for applications that deal with a sequence of inputs such as language modeling BIB17048224 , i.e., Fig. 2 . A typical CNN architecture for object detection. The network provides a feature representation with attention to the specific region of an image (example shown on the left) that contains the object of interest. Out of the multiple regions represented (see an ordering of the image blocks, giving image pixel intensity, on the right) by the network, the one with the highest score will be selected as the main candidate. representing language in a way that the machine understands. This concept will be described later in detail. RNNs can carry rich information from the past. Consider the sentence: "Michael Jackson was a singer; some people consider him King of Pop." It's easy for a human to identify him as referring to Michael Jackson. The pronoun him happens seven words after Michael Jackson; capturing this dependency is one of the benefits of RNNs, where the hidden layers in an RNN act as memory units. Long Short Term Memory Network (LSTM) BIB1915014 is one of the most widely used classes of RNNs. LSTMs try to capture even long time dependencies between inputs from different time steps. Modern Machine Translation and Speech Recognition often rely on LSTMs. Autoencoders: Autoencoders implement unsupervised methods in deep learning. They are widely used in dimensionality reduction BIB5590763 or NLP applications which consist of sequence to sequence modeling (see Section III-B BIB17048224 . Fig. 4 illustrates BIB5590763 Dimensionality reduction is an unsupervised learning approach which is the process of reducing the number of variables that were used to represent the data by identifying the most crucial information. the schematic of an Autoencoder. Since autoencoders are unsupervised, there is no label corresponding to each input. They aim to learn a code representation for each input. The encoder is like a feed-forward neural network in which the input gets encoded into a vector (code). The decoder operates similarly to the encoder, but in reverse, i.e., constructing an output based on the encoded input. In data compression applications, we want the created output to be as close as possible to the original input. Autoencoders are lossy, meaning the output is an approximate reconstruction of the input. Generative Adversarial Networks: Goodfellow BIB1033682 introduced Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). As shown in Fig. 5 , a GAN is a combination of two neural networks, a discriminator and a generator. The whole network is trained in an iterative process. First, the generator network generates a fake sample. Then the discriminator network tries to determine whether this sample (ex.: an input image) is real or fake, i.e., whether it came from the real training data (data used for building the model) or not. The goal of the generator is to fool the discriminator in a way that the discriminator believes the artificial (i.e., generated) samples synthesized by the generator are real. This iterative process continues until the generator produces samples that are indistinguishable by the discriminator. In other words, the probability of classifying a sample as fake or real becomes like flipping a fair coin for the discriminator. The goal of the generative model is to capture the distribution of real data while the discriminator tries to identify the fake data. One of the interesting features of GANs (regarding being generative) is: once the training phase is finished, there is no need for the discrimination network, so we solely can work with the generation network. In other words, having access to the trained generative model is sufficient. Different forms of GANs has been introduced, e.g., Sim GAN BIB8229065 , Wasserstein GAN BIB13943041 , info GAN BIB5002792 , and DC GAN BIB11758569 . In one of the most elegant GAN implementations BIB3568073 , entirely artificial, yet almost perfect, celebrity faces are generated; the pictures are not real, but fake photos produced by the network. In the NLP domain, GANs often are used for text generation BIB3439214 , BIB98180 .