Most underlying frameworks in NLP applications rely on sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models in which not only the input but also the output is represented as a sequence. These models are common in various applications including machine translation 4 , text summarization 5 , speech-to-text, and text-tospeech applications BIB206592191 . The most common seq2seq framework is comprised of an encoder and a decoder. The encoder ingests the sequence of input data and generates a mid-level output which is subsequently consumed by the decoder to produce the series of final outputs. The encoder and decoder are usually implemented via a series of Recurrent Neural Networks or LSTM BIB1915014 cells. The encoder takes a sequence of length T , X = {x 1 , x 2 , · · · , x T }, where x t ∈ V = {1, · · · , |V |} is the representation of a single input coming from the vocabulary V , and then generates the output state h t . Subsequently, the decoder takes the last state from the encoder, i.e., h t , and starts generating an output of size L, Y = {y 1 , y 2 , · · · , y L }, based on its current state, s t , and the ground-truth output y t . In different applications, the decoder could take advantage of more information such as a context vector BIB8314118 or intraattention vectors BIB21850704 to generate better outputs. One of the most widely training approaches for seq2seq models is called Teacher Forcing BIB1820089 . Let us define y = {y 1 , y 2 , · · · , y L } as the ground-truth output sequence correspondent to a given input sequence X. The model training based on the maximum-likelihood criterion employs the following cross-entropy (CE) loss minimization: where θ is the parameters of the model optimized during the training. Once the model is optimized using the cross-entropy loss, it can generate an entire sequence as follows. Letŷ t denote the output generated by the model at time t. Then, the next output is generated by: In NLP applications, one can improve the output by using beam search to find a reasonably good output sequence BIB5590763 . During beam search, rather than using argmax for selecting the best output, we choose the top K outputs at each step, generate K different paths for the output sequence, and finally choose the one that provides better performance as the final output. Although, there has been some recent studies BIB19200845 , BIB76662039 on improving the beam search by incorporating a similar mechanism during training of them model, studying this is outside the scope of this paper. Given a series of the ground-truth output Y and the generated model outputŶ , the model performance is evaluated using a task-specific measures such as ROUGE BIB964287 , BLEU BIB11080756 , and METEOR BIB7164502 . As an example, ROUGE L , which is an evaluation metric in NLP tasks, uses the largest common substring between ground-truth Y and model outputŶ to evaluate the generated output.