Document summarization refers to a set of problems involving generation of summary sentences given one or multiple documents as input. Generally, text summarization fits into two categories: 1) Extractive Summarization, where the goal is to identify the most salient sentences in the document and return them as the summary. 2) Abstractive Summarization, where the goal is to generate summary sentences from scratch; they may contain novel words that do not appear in the original document. Each of these methods has its own advantages and disadvantages. Extractive summarization is prone to generate long and sometimes overlapping summary sentences; however, the result reflects the author's mode of expression. Abstractive methods generate a shorter summary but they are hard to train. There is a vast amount of research on the topic of text summarization using extractive and abstractive methods. As one of the earliest works on using neural networks for extractive summarization, BIB6405271 proposed a framework that used a ranking technique to extract the most salient sentences in the input. This model was improved by BIB3510042 which used a document-level encoder to represent sentences, and a classifier to rank these sentences. On the other hand, in abstractive summarization, it was BIB1918428 which, for the first time, used attention over a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) model for the problem of headline generation. However, since simple attention models perform worse than extractive models, therefore more effective attention models such as graph-based attention  and transformers BIB13756489 have been proposed for this task. To further improve abstractive text summarization models, BIB8928715 proposed the first pointer-generator model and applied it to the DeepMind QA dataset BIB6203757 . As a result of this work, the CNN/Daily Mail dataset emerged which is now one of the widely used datasets for the summarization task. A copy mechanism was also adopted by BIB8174613 for similar tasks. But their analysis reveals a key problem with attention-based encoder-decoder models: they often generate unusual summaries consisting of repeated phrases. Recently, BIB8314118 reached state-of-the-art results on the abstractive text summarization using a similar framework. They alleviated the unnatural summaries by avoiding generating unknown tokens and replacing these words with tokens from the input article. Later, researchers moved their focus to methods that use sentence-embedding to first select the most salient sentence in the document and then change them to make them more abstractive BIB44129061 , BIB49656757 . In these models, salient sentences are extracted first and then a paraphrasing model is used to make them abstractive. The extraction employs a sentence classifier or ranker while the abstractor tries to remove the extra information in a sentence and present it as a shorter summary. Fast-RL BIB44129061 is the first framework in this family of works. In Fast-RL, the extractor is pre-trained to select salient sentences and the abstractor is pre-trained using a pointergenerator model to generate paraphrases. Finally, to merge these two non-differentiable components, they propose using Actor-Critic Q-learning methods in which the actor receives a single document and generates the output while the critic evaluates the output based on comparison with the groundtruth summary. Though the standard way to evaluate the performance of summarization models is with ROUGE BIB964287 and BLEU BIB11080756 , there are major problems with such measures. For instance, the ROUGE measure focuses on the number of shared n-grams between two sentences. Such a method incorrectly assigns a low score to an abstractive summary that uses different words yet provides an excellent paraphrase that humans would rate highly. Clearly, better automated evaluation methods are needed in such cases. There are additional problems with current summarization models. Shi et al.  provides a comprehensive survey on text summarization.