The primary goal in sentiment analysis is the extraction of subjective information from text by contextual mining. Sentiment analysis is considered high-level reasoning based on source data. Sentiment analysis is sometimes called opinion mining, as its primary goal is to analyze human opinion, sentiments, and even emotions regarding products, problems, and varied subjects. Important works on sentiment analysis or opinion mining include BIB3333256 , BIB1469556 . Since 2000, much attention has been given to sentiment analysis, due to its relation to a wide variety of applications, its associations with new research challenges, and the availability of abundant data. A critical aspect of research in sentiment analysis is content granularity. Considering this criterion, sentiment analysis is generally divided into three categories/levels: document level, sentence level, and aspect level. 1) Document-level Sentiment Analysis: At the document level, the task is to determine whether the whole document reflects a positive or negative sentiment about exactly one entity. This differs from opinion mining regarding multiple entries. The Gated Recurrent Neural Network architecture has been utilized successfully for effectively encoding the sentences' relations in the semantic structure of the document BIB784094 . Domain adaptation has been investigated as well, to deploy the trained model on unseen new sources BIB18235792 . 2) Sentence-level Sentiment Analysis: At the sentencelevel, sentiment analysis determines the positivity, negativity, or neutrality regarding an opinion expressed in a sentence. One general assumption for sentence-level sentiment classification is the existence of only one opinion from a single opinion holder in an expressed sentence. Recursive autoencoders have been employed for sentence-level sentiment label prediction by learning the vector space representations for phrases BIB3116311 . Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) recurrent models have also been utilized for tweet sentiment prediction BIB1952530 . The Sentiment Treebank and Recursive Neural Tensor Networks BIB990233 have shown promise for predicting fine-grained sentiment labels. 3) Aspect-level Sentiment Analysis: Document-level and sentence-level sentiment analysis usually focus on the sentiment itself, not the target of the sentiment, e.g., a product. Aspect-level sentiment analysis directly targets an opinion, with the assumption of the existence of the sentiment and its target. A document or sentence may not have a generally positive or negative sentiment, but may have multiple subparts with different targets, each with a positive or negative sentiment. This can make aspect-level analysis even more challenging than other types of sentiment categorization. Aspect-level sentiment analysis usually involves Aspect Sentiment Classification and Aspect Extraction. The former determines opinions on different aspects (positive, neutral, or negative) while the latter identifies the target aspect for evaluation in context. As an example consider the following sentence: "This car is old. It must be repaired and sold!". "This car" is what is subject to evaluation and must be extracted first. Here, the opinion about this aspect is negative. For aspect-level sentiment classification, attention-based LSTMs are proposed to connect the aspect and sentence content for sentiment classification  . For aspect extraction, deep learning has successfully been proposed in opinion mining BIB10276916 . State-of-the-art methods rely on converting aspect-based sentiment analysis to sentence-pair classification tasks BIB85459677 , post-training approaches BIB102353837 on the popular language model BERT BIB52967399 , and employment of pre-trained embeddings BIB44009215 .