Convolutional Seq-to-Seq BIB3648736 25.2 Attention Is All You Need BIB13756489 28.4 Weighted Transformer BIB29769422 28.9 Self Attention BIB3725815 29.2 DeepL Translation Machine BIB2834402 33.3 Back-translation  35.0 can be inferred from available documents. Other areas of NLP such as reading comprehension and dialogue systems intersect with question answering. Research in computerized question answering has proceeded since the 1960s. In this section, we present a general overview of question answering system history, and focus on the breakthroughs in the field. Like all other fields in NLP, question answering was also impacted by the advancement of deep learning BIB12938495 , so we provide an overview of QA in deep learning contexts. We briefly visit visual question answering as well. 1) Rule-based Question Answering: Baseball  is one of the early works (1961) on QA where an effort was made to answer questions related to baseball games by using a game database. The baseball system consists of (1) question read-in, (2) dictionary lookup for words in the question, (3) syntactic (POS) analysis of the words in question, (4) content analysis for extracting the input question, and (5) estimating relevance regarding answering the input question. IBM's  statistical question answering system consisted of four major components: 1) Question/Answer Type Classification 2) Query Expansion/Information Retrieval 3) Name Entity Making 4) Answer Selection Some QA systems fail when semantically equivalent relationships are phrased differently. BIB13246172 addressed this by proposing fuzzy relation matching based on mutual information and expectation maximization. 2) Question answering in the era of deep learning: Smartphones (Siri, Ok Google, Alexa, etc.) and virtual personal assistants are common examples of QA systems with which many interact on a daily basis. While earlier such systems employed rule-based methods, today their core algorithm is based on deep learning. Table VIII presents some questions and answers provided by Siri on an iPhone. BIB1199934 was one of the first machine learning based papers that reported results on QA for a reading comprehension test. The system tries to pick a sentence in the database that has an answer to a question, and a feature vector represents each question-sentence pair. The main contribution of BIB1199934 is proposing a feature vector representation framework which is aimed to provide information for learning the model. There are five classifiers (location, date, etc.), one for each type of question. They were able to achieve accuracy competitive with previous approaches. As illustrated in Fig. 13 , BIB17562582 uses convolutional neural networks in order to encode Question-Answer sentence pairs in the form of fixed length vectors regardless of the length of the input sentence. Instead of using distance measures like cosine correlation, they incorporate a non-linear tensor layer to match the relevance between question and answer. Equation 9 calculates the matching degree between question q and its corresponding answer a. f is the standard element-wise non-linearity function, The model tries to capture the interaction between question and answer. Inspired by findings in neuroscience, BIB2319779 incorporated episodic memory 11 in their Dynamic Memory Network (DMN). By processing input sequences and questions, DMN forms episodic memories to answer relevant questions. As illustrated in Fig. 14, their system is trained based on raw Input-Question-Answer triplets. DMN consists of four modules that communicate with each other as shown in Fig. 15 . The input module encodes raw input text into a distributed vector representation; likewise the question module encodes a question into its distributed vector representation. The episodic memory module uses the attention mechanism in order to focus on a specific part of the input module. Through an iterative process, this module produces a memory vector representation that considers the question as well as previous memory. The answer module uses the final memory vector to generate an answer. The model improved upon state-of-the-art results on tasks such as the ones shown in Fig. 14. DMN is one of the architectures that could potentially be used for a variety of NLP applications such as classification, question answering, and sequence modeling. [147] introduced a Dynamic Coattention Network (DCN) in order to address local maxima corresponding to incorrect answers; it is considered to be one of the best approaches to question answering. 3) Visual Question Answering: Given an input image, Visual Question Answering (VQA) tries to answer a natural language question about the image BIB58727669 . VQN addresses multiple problems such as object detection, image segmentation, sentiment analysis, etc. BIB58727669 introduced the task of VQA by providing a dataset containing over 250K images, 760K questions, and around 10M answers. BIB738850 proposed a neuralbased approach to answer the questions regarding the input Fig. 13 . Fixed length vector sentence representation for input Questions and Answers BIB17562582 . images. As illustrated in Fig. 16 , Neural-Image-QA is a deep network consisting of CNN and LSTM. Since the questions can have multiple answers, the problem is decomposed into predicting a set of answer words a q,x = {a 1 , a 2 , ..., a N (q,x) } from a finite vocabulary set ν where N (q, x) represents the count of answer words regarding a given question. Do humans and computers look at the same regions to answer questions about an image? BIB63471462 tries to answer this question by conducting large-scale studies on human attention in VQA. Their findings show that VQAs do not seem to be looking at the same regions as humans. Finally, BIB10363459 incorporates a spatial memory network for VQA. Fig. 17 shows the inference process of their model. As illustrated in the figure, the specific attention mechanism in their system can highlight areas of interest in the input image.