This section describes NLP applications using deep learning. Fig. 8 shows representative NLP tasks (and the categories they belong to). A fundamental question is: "How can we evaluate an NLP algorithm, model, or system?" In  , some of the most common evaluation metrics have been described. This reference explains the fundamental principles of evaluating NLP systems. A. Basic Tasks 1) Part-Of-Speech Tagging: Part-of-Speech tagging is one of the basic tasks in Natural Language Processing. It is the process of labeling words with their part of speech categories. Part of speech is leveraged for many crucial tasks such as named entity recognition. One commonly used dataset for Part-of-Speech tagging is the WSJ corpus 7 . This dataset contains over a million tokens and has been utilized widely as a benchmark dataset for the performance assessment of POS tagging systems. Traditional methods are still performing very well for this task BIB13232120 . However, neural network based methods have been proposed for Part-of-Speech tagging BIB2319779 . For example, the deep neural network architecture named CharWNN has been developed to join word-level and character-level representations using convolutional neural networks for POS tagging BIB2834402 . The emphasis in BIB2834402 is the importance of character-level feature extraction as their experimental results show the necessity of employing hand-crafted features in the absence of character-level features for achieving the state-of-the-art. In BIB12740621 , a wide variety of neural network based models have been proposed for sequence tagging tasks, e.g., LSTM networks, bidirectional LSTM networks, LSTM networks with a CRF 8 layer, etc. Sequence tagging itself includes part of speech tagging, chunking, and named entity recognition. Likewise, a globally normalized transition-based neural network architecture has been proposed for POStagging BIB2952144 . State-of-the-art results are summarized in Table  II . 2) Parsing: Parsing is assigning a structure to a recognized string. There are different types of parsing. Constituency Parsing refers in particular to assigning a syntactic structure to a sentence. A greedy parser has been introduced in BIB14482228 which performs a syntactic and semantic summary of content using vector representations. To enhance the results achieved by BIB14482228 , the approach proposed in BIB1835119 focuses on learning morphological embeddings. Recently, deep neural network models outperformed traditional algorithms. State-of-the-art results are summarized in Table III . Another type of parsing is called Dependency Parsing. Dependency structure shows the structural relationships between the words in a targeted sentence. In dependency parsing, BIB8229065 Penn Treebank Wall Street Journal (WSJ-PTB). BIB1166498 Conditional Random Field. phrasal elements and phrase-structure rules do not contribute to the process. Rather, the syntactic structure of the sentence is expressed only in terms of the words in the sentence and the associated relations between the words. Neural networks have shown their superiority regarding generalizability and reducing the feature computation cost. In BIB11616343 , a novel neural network-based approach was proposed for a transition-based dependency parser. Neural network based models that operate on task-specific transition systems have also been utilized for dependency parsing BIB2952144 . A regularized parser with bi-affine classifiers has been proposed for the prediction of arcs and labels BIB7942973 . Bidirectional-LSTMs have been used in dependency parsers for feature representation BIB1642392 . A new control structure has been introduced for sequence-tosequence neural networks based on the stack LSTM and has been used in transition-based parsing BIB6278207 . 3) Semantic Role Labeling: Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) is the process of identification and classification of text arguments. It is aimed at the characterization of elements to determine "who" did "what" to "whom" as well as "how," "where," and "when." It identifies the predicate-argument structure of a sentence. The predicate, in essence, refers to "what," while the arguments consist of the associated participants and properties in the text. The goal of SRL is to extract the semantic relations between the predicate and the related arguments. Most of the previously-reported research efforts are based on explicit representations of semantic roles. Recently, deep learning approaches have achieved the SRL state-of-the-art without taking the explicit syntax representation into consideration BIB12842009 . On the other hand, it is argued that the utilization of syntactic information can be leveraged to improve the performance of syntactic-agnostic 9 models BIB16839291 . A linguisticallyinformed self-attention (LISA) model has been proposed to leverage both multi-task learning and self-attention for effective utilization of the syntactic information for SRL BIB5068376 . Current state-of-the-art methods employ joint prediction of predicates and arguments BIB44152851 , novel word representation approaches BIB3626819 , and self-attention models BIB12842009 ; see Table IV .