Distributed representations are a series of compact, low dimensional representations of data, each representing some distinct informative property. For NLP systems, due to issues related to the atomic representation of the symbols, it is imperative to learn word representations. At first, let's concentrate on how the features are represented, and then we focus on different approaches for learning word representations. The encoded input features can be characters, words BIB18690358 , sentences BIB2407601 , or other linguistic elements. Generally, it is more desirable to provide a compact representation of the words than a sparse one. How to select the structure and level of text representation used to be an unresolved question. After proposing the word2vec approach BIB16447573 , subsequently, doc2vec was proposed in BIB2407601 as an unsupervised algorithm and was called Paragraph Vector (PV). The goal behind PV is to learn fixed-length representations from variable-length text parts such as sentences and documents. One of the main objectives of doc2vec is to overcome the drawbacks of models such as BoW and to provide promising results for applications such as text classification and sentiment analysis. A more recent approach is the skip-thought model which applies word2vec at the sentencelevel BIB9126867 . By utilizing an encoder-decoder architecture, this model generates the surrounding sentences using the given sentence ( Fig. 6 ). Next, let's investigate different kinds of feature representation. 1) One-Hot Representation: In one-hot encoding, each unique element that needs to be represented has its dimension which results in a very high dimensional, very sparse representation. Assume the words are represented with the one-hot encoding method. Regarding representation structure, there is no meaningful connection between different words in the feature space. For example, highly correlated words such as 'ocean' and 'water' will not be closer to each other (in the representation space) compared to less correlated pairs such as 'ocean' and 'fire.' Nevertheless, some research efforts present promising results using one-hot encoding BIB368182 . 2) Continuous Bag of Words: Continuous Bag-of-Words model (CBOW) has frequently been used in NLP applications. CBOW tries to predict a word given its surrounding context, which usually consists of a few nearby words BIB5959482 . CBOW is neither dependent on the sequential order of words nor necessarily on probabilistic characteristics. So it is not generally used for language modeling. This model is typically trained to be utilized as a pre-trained model for more sophisticated tasks. An alternative to CBOW is the weighted CBOW (WCBOW) BIB115475029 in which different vectors get different weights reflective of relative importance in context. The simplest example can be document categorization where features are words and weights are TF-IDF scores BIB60593 of the associated words. 3) Word-Level Embedding: Word embedding is a learned representation for context elements in which, ideally, words with related semantics become highly correlated in the representation space. One of the main incentives behind word embedding representations is the high generalization power as opposed to sparse, higher dimensional representations  . Unlike the traditional bag-of-words model in which different words have entirely different representations regardless of their usage or collocations, learning a distributed representation takes advantage of word usage in context to provide similar representations for semantically correlated words. There are different approaches to create word embeddings. Several research efforts, including BIB16447573 , BIB5959482 , used random initialization by uniformly sampling random numbers with the objective of training an efficient representation of the model on a large dataset. This setup is intuitively acceptable for initialization of the embedding for common features such as part-of-speech tags. However, this may not be the optimum method for representation of less frequent features such as individual words. For the latter, pre-trained models, trained in a supervised or unsupervised manner, are usually leveraged for increasing the performance. 4) Character-Level Embedding: The methods mentioned earlier are mostly at higher levels of representation. Lowerlevel representations such as character-level representation require special attention as well, due to their simplicity of representation and the potential for correction of unusual character combinations such as misspellings BIB368182 . For generating character-level embeddings, CNNs have successfully been utilized BIB2834402 . Character-level embeddings have been used in different NLP applications BIB6058083 . One of the main advantages is the ability to use small model sizes and represent words with lower-level language elements BIB2834402 . Here word embeddings are models utilizing CNNs over the characters. Another motivation for employing character-level embeddings is the outof-vocabulary word (OOV) issue which is usually encountered when, for the given word, there is no equivalent vector in the word embedding. The character-level approach may significantly alleviate this problem. Nevertheless, this approach suffers from a weak correlation between characters and semantic and syntactic parts of the language. So, considering the aforementioned pros and cons of utilizing character-level embeddings, several research efforts tried to propose and implement higher-level approaches such as using sub-words BIB207556454 to create word embeddings for OOV instances as well as creating a semantic bridge between the correlated words BIB2838374 .