Information extraction identifies structured information from "unstructured" data such as social media posts and online news. Deep learning has been utilized for information extraction regarding subtasks such as Named Entity Recognition, Relation Extraction, Coreference Resolution, and Event Extraction. 1) Named Entity Recognition: Named Entity Recognition (NER) aims to locate and categorize named entities in context into pre-defined categories such as the names of people and places. The application of deep neural networks in NER has been investigated by the employment of CNN BIB351666 and RNN architectures BIB1701504 , as well as hybrid bidirectional LSTM and CNN architectures BIB6300165 . NeuroNER BIB2816661 , a named-entity recognition tool, operates based on artificial neural networks. State-of-the-art models are reported in Table VI . 2) Relation Extraction: Relation Extraction aims to find the semantic relationships between entity pairs. The recursive neural network (RNN) model has been proposed for semantic relationship classification by learning compositional vector representations BIB806709 . For relation classification, CNN architectures have been employed as well, by extracting lexical and sentence level features BIB12873739 . 3) Coreference Resolution: Coreference resolution includes identification of the mentions in a context that refer to the same entity. For instance, the mentions "car," "Camry," and "it" could all refer to the same entity. For the first time in BIB2012188 , Reinforcement Learning (RL) was applied to coreference resolution. Current state-of-the-art methods leverage an attention mechanism BIB4891749 . 4) Event Extraction: A specific type of extracted information from text is an event. Such extraction may involve recognizing trigger words related to an event and assigning labels to entity mentions that represent event triggers. Convolutional neural networks have been utilized for event detection; they handle problems with feature-based approaches including exhaustive feature engineering and error propagation phenomena for feature generation BIB14339673 . In 2018, Nguyen and Grishman applied graph-CNN (GCCN) where the convolutional operations are applied to syntactically dependent words as well as consecutive words  ; their adding entity information reflected the state-of-the-art using CNN models.