Dialogue Systems are quickly becoming a principal instrument in human-computer interaction, due in part to their promising potential and commercial value. One application is automated customer service, supporting both online and bricks-and-mortar businesses. Customers expect an everincreasing level of speed, accuracy, and respect while dealing with companies and their services. Due to the high cost of knowledgeable human resources, companies frequently turn to intelligent conversational machines. Note that the phrases conversational machines and dialogue machines are often used interchangeably. Dialogue systems are usually task-based or non-taskbased ( Fig. 18 ). Though there might be Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) and Language-to-Speech (L2S) components in a dialogue system, the discussion of this section is solely about the linguistic components of dialogue systems; concepts associated with speech technology are ignored. Despite useful statistical models employed in the backend of dialogue systems (especially in language understanding modules), most deployed dialogue systems rely on expensive hand-crafted and manual features for operation. Furthermore, the generalizability of these manually engineered systems to other domains and functionalities is problematic. Hence, recent attention has focused on deep learning for the enhancement of performance, generalizability, and robustness. Deep learning facilitates the creation of end-to-end task-oriented dialogue systems, which enriches the framework to generalize conversations beyond annotated task-specific dialogue resources. 1) Task-based Systems: The structure of a task-based dialogue system usually consists of the following elements: • Natural Language Understanding (NLU): This component deals with understanding and interpreting user's spoken context by assigning a constituent structure to the spoken utterance (e.g., a sentence) and captures its syntactic representation and semantic interpretation, to allow the back-end operation/task. NLU is usually leveraged regardless of the dialogue context. 18 . The framework of a dialogue system. A dialogue system can be task oriented or used for natural language generation based on the user input which is also known as a chat bot. The general pipeline is as follows: NLU module (i.e., semantic decoder) transforms the output of the speech recognition module to some dialogue elements. Then the DM processes these dialogue elements and provides a suitable response which is fed to the NLG for response generation. The main pipeline in NLU is to classify the user query domain and user intent, and fill a set of slots to create a semantic frame. It is usually customary to perform the intent prediction and the slot filling simultaneously BIB5775306 . Most of the taskoriented dialogue systems employ slot-filling approaches to classify user intent in the specific domain of the conversation. For this aim, having predefined tasks is required; this depends on manually crafted states with different associated slots. Henceforth, a designed dialogue system would be of limited or no use for other tasks. Recent task-oriented dialogue systems have been designed based on deep reinforcement learning, which provided promising results regarding performance BIB3632088 , domain adaptation BIB3655952 , and dialogue generation BIB3147007 . This was due to a shift towards end-to-end trainable frameworks to design and deploy task-oriented dialogue systems. Instead of the traditionally utilized pipeline, an end-to-end framework incorporates and uses a single module that deals with external databases. Despite the tractability of end-to-end dialogue systems (i.e., easy to train and simple to engineer), due to their need for interoperability with external databases via queries, they are not well-suited for task-oriented settings. Some approaches to this challenge include converting the user input into internal representations BIB10565222 , combining supervised and reinforced learning BIB12923236 , and extending the memory network approach  for question-answering to a dialog system  . 2) Non-task-based Systems: As opposed to task-based dialogue systems, the goal behind designing and deploying nontask-based dialogue systems is to empower a machine with the ability to have a natural conversation with humans BIB780171 . Typically, chatbots are of one of the following types: retrievalbased methods and generative methods. Retrieval-based models have access to information resources and can provide more concise, fluent, and accurate responses. However, they are limited regarding the variety of responses they can provide due to their dependency on backend data resources. Generative models, on the other hand, have the advantage of being able to produce suitable responses when such responses are not in the corpus. However, as opposed to retrieval-based models, they are more prone to grammatical and conceptual mistakes arising from their generative models. Retrieval-based methods select an appropriate response from the candidate responses. Therefore, the key element is the query-response operation. In general, this problem has been formulated as a search problem and uses IR techniques for task completion BIB18380963 . Retrieval-based methods usually employ either Single-turn Response Matching or Multi-turn Response Matching. In the first type, the current query (message) is solely used to select a suitable response BIB4497054 . The latter type takes the current message and previous utterances as the system input and retrieves a response based on the instant and temporal information. The model tries to choose a response which considers the whole context to guarantee conversation consistency. An LSTM-based model has been proposed BIB8379583 for context and response vectors creation. In BIB207237683 , various features and multiple data inputs have been incorporated to be ingested using a deep learning framework. Current base models regarding retrieval-based chatbots rely on multi-turn response selection augmented by an attention mechanism and sequence matching  . Generative models don't assume the availability of predefined responses. New responses are produced from scratch and are based on the trained model. Generative models are typically based on sequence to sequence models and map an input query to a target element as the response. In general, designing and implementing a dialogue agent to be able to converse at the human level is very challenging. The typical approach usually consists of learning and imitating human conversation. For this goal, the machine is generally trained on large corpora of conversations. However, this does not directly remedy the issue of encountering out-of-corpus conversation. The question is: How can an agent be taught to generate proper responses to conversations that it never has seen? It must handle content that is not exactly available in the data corpus that the machine has been trained on, due to the lack of content matching between the query and the corresponding response, resulting from the wide range of plausible queries that humans can provide. To tackle the aforementioned general problem, some fundamental questions must be answered: (1) What are the core characteristics of a natural conversation? (2) How can these characteristics be measured? (3) How can we incorporate this knowledge in a machine, i.e., the dialogue system? Effective integration of these three elements determines the intelligence of a machine. A qualitative criterion is to observe if the generated utterances can be distinguished from natural human dialogues. For quantitative evaluation, adversarial evaluation was initially used for quality assessment of sentence generation BIB748227 and employed for quality evaluation of dialogue systems BIB12850509 . Recent advancements in sequence to sequence modeling encouraged many research efforts regarding natural language generation BIB12300158 . Furthermore, deep reinforcement learning yields promising performance in natural language generation BIB3147007 . 3) Final note on dialogue systems: Despite remarkable advancements in AI and much attention dedicated to dialogue systems, in reality, successful commercial tools, such as Apple's Siri and Amazon's Alexa, still heavily rely on handcrafted features. It still is very challenging to design and train data-driven dialogue machines given the complexity of the natural language, the difficulties in framework design, and the complex nature of available data sources.