N ATURAL Language Processing (NLP) is a sub-discipline of computer science providing a bridge between natural languages and computers. It helps empower machines to understand, process, and analyze human language  . NLP's significance as a tool aiding comprehension of human-generated data is a logical consequence of the context-dependency of data. Data becomes more meaningful through a deeper understanding of its context, which in turn facilitates text analysis and mining. NLP enables this with the communication structures and patterns of humans. Development of NLP methods is increasingly reliant on data-driven approaches which help with building more powerful and robust models BIB368182 , BIB5590763 . Recent advances in computational power, as well as greater availability of big data, enable deep learning, one of the most appealing approaches in the NLP domain BIB368182 - BIB2617020 , especially given that deep learning has already demonstrated superior performance in adjoining fields like Computer Vision BIB206592218 - BIB8229065 and Speech Recognition BIB1166498 , BIB11590585 . These developments led to a paradigm shift from traditional to novel data-driven approaches aimed at advancing NLP. The reason behind this shift was simple: new approaches are more promising regarding results, and are easier to engineer. As a sequitur to remarkable progress achieved in adjacent disciplines utilizing deep learning methods, deep neural networks have been applied to various NLP tasks, including partof-speech tagging BIB2834402 - BIB13232120 , named entity recognition BIB6042994 , BIB6042994 , BIB6300165 , and semantic role labeling BIB12688069 -  . Most of the research efforts in deep learning associated with NLP applications involve either supervised learning 1 or unsupervised learning 2 . This survey covers the emerging role of deep learning in the area of NLP, across a broad range of categories. The research presented in BIB3397190 is primarily focused on architectures, with little discussion of applications. On the other hand, this paper describes the challenges, opportunities, and evaluations of the impact of applying deep learning to NLP problems. This survey has six sections, including this introduction. Section 2 lays out the theoretical dimensions of NLP and artificial intelligence, and looks at deep learning as an approach to solving real-world problems. It motivates this study by addressing the question: Why use deep learning in NLP? The third section discusses fundamental concepts necessary to understand NLP, covering exemplary issues in representation, frameworks, and machine learning. The fourth section summarizes benchmark datasets employed in the NLP domain. Section 5 focuses on some of the NLP applications where deep learning has demonstrated significant benefit. Finally, Section 6 provides a conclusion, also addressing some open problems and promising areas for improvement.