Machine Translation (MT) is one of the areas of NLP that has been profoundly affected by the advances in deep learning. The first subsection below explains methods used in the pre-deep learning period, as explained in reference NLP textbooks such as "Speech and Language Processing"  . The remainder of this section is dedicated to delving into recent innovations in MT which are based on neural networks, started by BIB12639289 . 1) Traditional Machine Translation: One of the first demonstrations of machine translation happened in 1954  in which the authors tried to translate from Russian to English. This translation system was based on six simple rules, but had a very limited vocabulary. It was not until the 1990s that successful statistical implementations of machine translation emerged as more bilingual corpora became available  . In BIB11080756 the BLEU score was introduced as a new evaluation metric, allowing more rapid improvement than when the only approach involved using human labor for evaluation. 2) Neural Machine Translation: It was after the success of the neural network in image classification tasks that researchers started to use neural networks in machine translation (NMT). Around 2013, research groups started to achieve breakthrough results in NMT. Unlike traditional statistical machine translation, NMT is based on an end-to-end neural network BIB11212020 . This implies that there is no need for extensive preprocessing and word alignments. Instead, the focus shifted toward network structure. Fig. 11 shows an example of an end-to-end recurrent neural network for machine translation. A sequence of input tokens is fed into the network. Once it reaches an end-of-sentence (EOS) token, it starts generating the output sequence. The output sequence is generated in the same recurrent manner as the input sequence until it reaches an end-of-sentence token. One major advantage of this approach is that there is no need to specify the length of the sequence; the network takes it into account automatically. In other words, the end-of-sentence token determines the length of the sequence. Networks implicitly learn that longer input sentences usually lead to longer Fig. 9 . Alignment in Machine Translation output sentences with varying length, and that ordering can change. For instance, the second example in Fig. 9 shows that adjectives generally come before nouns in English but after nouns in Spanish. There is no need to explicitly specify this since the network can capture such properties. Moreover, the amount of memory that is used by NMT is just a fraction of the memory that is used in traditional statistical machine translation  . [130] was one of the early works that incorporated recurrent neural networks for machine translation. They were able to achieve a perplexity (a measure where lower values indicate better models) that was 43% less than the state-of-the-art alignment based translation models. Their recurrent continuous translation model (RCTM) is able to capture word ordering, syntax, and meaning of the source sentence explicitly. It maps a source sentence into a probability distribution over sentences in the target language. RCTM estimates the probability P (f |e) of translating a sentence e = e 1 + ... + e k in the source language to target language sentence f = f 1 +...+f m . RCTM estimates P (f |e) by considering source sentence e as well as the preceding words in the target language f 1:i−1 : The representation generated by RCTM acts on n-grams in the lower layers, and acts more on the whole sentence as one moves to the upper layers. This hierarchical representation is performed by applying different layers of convolution. First a continuous representation of each word is generated; i.e., if the sentence is e = e 1 ...e k , the representation of the word e i will be v(e i ) ∈ R q×1 . This will result in sentence matrix E e ∈ R q×k in which E e :,i = v(e i ). This matrix representation of the sentence will be fed into a series of convolution layers in order to generate the final representation e for the recurrent neural network. The approach is illustrated in Fig. 10 . Equations for the pipeline are as follows.  In order to take into account the sentence length, the authors introduced RCTM II which estimates the length of the target sentence. RCTM II was able to achieve better perplexity on WMT datasets (see top portion of Table I ) than other existing machine translation systems. In another line of work, BIB7961699 presented an end-to-end sequence learning approach without heavy assumptions on the structure of the sequence. Their approach consists of two LSTMs, one for mapping the input to a vector of fixed dimension and another LSTM for decoding the output sequence from the vector. Their model was able to handle long sentences as well as sentence representations that are sensitive to word order. As shown in Fig. 11 , the model reads "ABC" as an input sequence and produces "WXYZ" as output sequence. The < EOS > token indicates the end of prediction. The network was trained by maximizing the log probability of the translation (η) given the input sequence (ζ). In other words, the objective function is: D is the training set and |D| is its size. One of the novelties of their approach was reversing word order of the source sentence. This helps the LSTM to learn long term dependencies. Having a fixed-length vector in the decoder phase is one of the bottlenecks of the encoder-decoder approach. BIB11212020 argues that a network will have a hard time compressing all the information from the input sentence into a fixed-size vector. They address this by allowing the network to search segments of the source sentence that are useful for predicting the translation. Instead of representing the input sentence as a fixed-size vector, in BIB11212020 the input sentence is encoded to a sequence of vectors and a subset of them is chosen by using a method called attention mechanism as shown in Fig. 12 . In their approach P (y i |y 1 , ..., y i−1 , X) = g(y i−1 , s i , c i ), in which s i = f (s i−1 , y i−1 , c i ). While previously c was the same for all time steps, here c takes a different value, c i , at each time step. This accounts for the attention mechasim (context vector) around that specific time step. c i is computed according to the following: , e ij = a(s i−1 , h j ) . Here a is the alignment model that is represented by a feed forward neural network. Also , which is a way to include information both about preceding and following words in h j . The model was able to outperform the simple encoderdecoder approach regardless of input sentence length. Improved machine translation models continue to emerge, driven in part by the growth in people's interest and need to understand other languages Most of them are variants of the end-to-end decoder-encoder approach. For example, BIB3603249 tries to deal with the problem of rare words. Their LSTM network consists of encoder and decoder layers using residual layers along with the attention mechanism. Their system was able to decrease training time, speed up inference, and handle translation of rare words. Comparisons between some of the state-of-the-art neural machine translation models are summarized in Table VII .