Deep learning applications are predicated on the choices of (1) feature representation and (2) deep learning algorithm alongside architecture. These are associated with data representation and learning structure, respectively. For data representation, surprisingly, there usually is a disjunction between what information is thought to be important for the task at hand, versus what representation actually yields good results. For instance, in sentiment analysis, lexicon semantics, syntactic structure, and context are assumed by some linguists to be of primary significance. Nevertheless, previous studies based on the bag-of-words (BoW) model demonstrated acceptable performance BIB7105713 . The bag-of-words model  , often viewed as the vector space model, involves a representation which accounts only for the words and their frequency of occurrence. BoW ignores the order and interaction of words, and treats each word as a unique feature. BoW disregards syntactic structure, yet provides decent results for what some would consider syntax-dependent applications. This observation suggests that simple representations, when coupled with large amounts of data, may work as well or better than more complex representations. These findings corroborate the argument in favor of the importance of deep learning algorithms and architectures. Often the progress of NLP is bound to effective language modeling. A goal of statistical language modeling is the probabilistic representation of word sequences in language, which is a complicated task due to the curse of dimensionality. The research presented in BIB2852525 was a breakthrough for language modeling with neural networks aimed at overcoming the curse of dimensionality by (1) learning a distributed representation of words and (2) providing a probability function for sequences. A key challenge in NLP research, compared to other domains such as Computer Vision, seems to be the complexity of achieving an in-depth representation of language using statistical models. A primary task in NLP applications is to provide a representation of texts, such as documents. This involves feature learning, i.e., extracting meaningful information to enable further processing and analysis of the raw data. Traditional methods begin with time-consuming handcrafting of features, through careful human analysis of a specific application, and are followed by development of algorithms to extract and utilize instances of those features. On the other hand, deep supervised feature learning methods are highly data-driven and can be used in more general efforts aimed at providing a robust data representation. Due to the vast amounts of unlabeled data, unsupervised feature learning is considered to be a crucial task in NLP. Unsupervised feature learning is, in essence, learning the features from unlabeled data to provide a low-dimensional representation of a high-dimensional data space. Several approaches such as K-means clustering and principal component analysis have been proposed and successfully implemented to this end. With the advent of deep learning and abundance of unlabeled data, unsupervised feature learning becomes a crucial task for representation learning, a precursor in NLP applications. Currently, most of the NLP tasks rely on annotated data, while a preponderance of unannotated data further motivates research in leveraging deep data-driven unsupervised methods. Given the potential superiority of deep learning approaches in NLP applications, it seems crucial to perform a comprehensive analysis of various deep learning methods and architectures with particular attention to NLP applications.