Although the seq2seq models explained in Section III-B achieve great successes w.r.t. traditional methods, there are some issues with how these models are trained. Generally speaking, seq2seq models like the ones used in NLP applications face two issues: (1) exposure bias and (2) inconsistency between training time and test time measurements BIB44063077 . Most of the popular seq2seq models are minimizing crossentropy loss as their optimization objective via Teacher Forcing (Section III-B). In teacher forcing, during the training of the model, the decoder utilizes two inputs, the former decoder output state s t−1 and the ground-truth input y t , to determine its current output state s t . Moreover, it employs them to create the next token, i.e.,ŷ t . However, at test time, the decoder fully relies on the previously created token from the model distribution. As the ground-truth data is not available, such a step is necessary to predict the next action. Henceforth, in training, the decoder input is coming from the ground truth, while, in the test phase, it relies on the previous prediction. This exposure bias BIB7147309 induces error growth through output creation at the test phase. One approach to remedy this problem is to remove the ground-truth dependency in training by solely relying on model distribution to minimize the crossentropy loss. Scheduled sampling BIB1820089 is one popular method to handle this setback. During scheduled sampling, we first pre-train the model using cross-entropy loss and then slowly replace the ground-truth with samples the model generates. The second obstacle with seq2seq models is that, when training is finished using the cross-entropy loss, it is typically evaluated using non-differentiable measures such as ROUGE or METEOR. This will form an inconsistency between the training objective and the test evaluation metric. Recently, it has been demonstrated that both of these problems can be tackled by utilizing techniques from reinforcement learning BIB44063077 . Among most of the well-known models in reinforcement learning, policy gradient techniques BIB17710225 such as the REIN-FORCE algorithm BIB19115634 and actor-critic based models such as value-based iteration BIB9166388 , and Q-learning BIB208910339 , are among the most common techniques used in deep learning in NLP. Using the model predictions (versus the ground-truth) for the sequence to sequence modeling and generation, at training time, was initially introduced by Daume et al. BIB704519 . According to their approach, SEARN, the structured prediction can be characterized as one of the reinforcement learning cases as follows: The model employs its predictions to produce a sequence of actions (words sequences). Then, at each time step, a greedy search algorithm is employed to learn the optimal action, and the policy will be trained to predict that particular action. In Actor-Critic training, the actor is usually the same neural network used to generate the output, while the critic is a regression model that estimates how the actor performed on the input data. The actor later receives the feedback from the critic and improves its actions. Fig 7 shows this framework. It is worth noting that action in most of the NLP-related applications is like selecting the next output token while the state is the decoder output state at each stage of decoding. These models have mostly been used for robotic BIB7242892 and Atari games BIB17195923 due to the small action space in these applications. However, when we use them in NLP applications, they face multiple challenges. The action space in most of the NLP applications could be defined as the number of tokens in the vocabulary (usually between 50K to 150K tokens). Comparing this to the action space in a simple Atari game, which on average has less than 20 actions BIB17195923 , shows why these Actor-Critic models face difficulties when applied to NLP applications. A major challenge is the massive action space in NLP applications, which not only causes difficulty for the right action selection, but also will make the training process very slow. This makes the process of finding the best Actor-Critic model very complicated and model convergence usually requires a lot of tweaks to the models. IV. DATASETS Many different researchers for different tasks use benchmark datasets, such as those discussed below. Benchmarking in machine learning refers to the assessment of methods and algorithms, comparing those regarding their capability to learn specific patterns. Benchmarking aids validation of a new approach or practice, relative to other existing methods. Benchmark datasets typically take one of three forms. 1) The first is real-world data, obtained from various realworld experiments. 2) The second is synthetic data, artificially generated to mimic real-world patterns. Synthetic data is generated for use instead of real data. Such datasets are of special interest in applications where the amount of data required is much larger than that which is available, or where privacy considerations are crucial and strict, such as in the healthcare domain. 3) The third type are toy datasets, used for demonstration and visualization purposes. Typically they are artificially generated; often there is no need to represent real-world data patterns. The foundation of Deep Learning utilization is the availability of data to teach the system about pattern identification. The effectiveness of the model depends on the quality of the data. Despite the successful implementation of universal language modeling techniques such as BERT BIB85459677 , however, such models can be used solely for pre-training the models. Afterward, the model needs to be trained on the data associated with the desired task. Henceforth, based on the everyday demands in different machine domains such as NLP, creating new datasets is crucial. On the other hand, creating new datasets is not usually an easy matter. Informally speaking, the newly created dataset should be: the right data to train on, sufficient for the evaluation, and accurate to work on. Answering the questions of "what is the meaning of right and accurate data" is highly application-based. Basically, the data should have sufficient information, which depends on the quality and quantity of the data. To create a dataset, the first step is always asking "what are we trying to do and what problem do we need to solve?" and "what kind of data do we need and how much of it is required?" The next step is to create training and testing portions. The training data set is used to train a model to know how to find the connections between the inputs and the associated outputs. The test data set is used to assess the intelligence of the machine, i.e., how well the trained model can operate on the unseen test samples. Next, we must conduct data preparation to make sure the data and its format is simple and understandable for human experts. After that, the issue of data accessibility and ownership may arise. Distribution of data may need to have specific authorizations, especially if we are dealing with sensitive or private data. Given the aforementioned roadmap, creating proper datasets is complicated and of great importance. That's why few datasets are frequently chosen by the researchers and developers for benchmarking. A summary of widely used benchmark datasets is provided in Table I .