Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM

Document 1-2

Filed 10/04/13 Page 1 of 31
FT ECTRONICALL FILFf) -1 013,1:20 PM
)-(\ -2013-9014)4(i
CIP(J IT COUR I OF M )NTOMFRY COUNT', \L\B\\t.\
I IFFANY B \ICCORD, CLERK

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF MONTGOMERY COUNTY, ALABAMA

HARRIET DELORES CLEVELAND,

Petitioner,

VS.

Case No. 03-CV-2013-901494.00

CITY OF MONTGOMERY, THE HONORABLE MILTON J. WESTRY,

Respondents.

AMENDED PETITION FOR DECLARATORY RELIEFS WRIT OF CERTIORARI, OR, IN THE ALTERNATIVE, WRIT OF MANDAMUS

COMES NOW Petitioner Harriet Delores Cleveland, by and through undersigned

counsel, and states as follows:

I. INTRoDucTIoN

I. Petitioner Harriet Cleveland is an indigent woman who was ordered' to be

incarcerated in the Montgomery Municipal Jail, in violation of her constitutional rights to due

process, equal protection, and to counsel.

2. Petitioner has been unable to find full time employment Since she was laid off

from her job at a day care in 2009. She has been babysitting and renting out rooms in her home

to strangers in order to make ends meet. Very recently, she obtained a part time job as a

custodian.

3. In 2008 and 2009, when a police roadblock was often set up in her West

Montgomery neighborhood, she incurred several tickets because she could not afford car

insurance. Her license was soon suspended because she could not pay the fines imposed, and she

obtained tickets for this failure as well when she drove to work and took her child to school.

This order remains in effect, but Petitioner was released from jail on a bond pending the resolution of her appeal.

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 2 of 31

4. On August 20, 2013, Petitioner was arrested at her home for failure to pay fines

and costs associated with various traffic tickets in the Montgomery Municipal Court ("Municipal

Court"). She had received a letter from the District Attorney, notifying her that she "MUST pay

this amount in full within SEVEN (7) days of the date of this notice or [she] may be

ARRESTED." (emphasis in original).

5. The Municipal Court ordered Petitioner to either pay $1554 immediately to

satisfy those fines, or be immediately taken into custody to serve a 31 day sentence. Petitioner

told the Municipal Court that she could not pay the full amount, but nonetheless was taken to the

Montgomery Municipal Jail immediately, where she remains.

6. The incarceration is unconstitutional for at least two reasons:

7. First: It is unconstitutional under both the due process and equal protection

clauses of the United States and Alabama Constitution to jail an indigent person for failure to pay

a fine. U.S. Const. amend. XIV; Ala. Const. art. I, § 1, 6, 22; Ala. R. Crim. P. 26.11 (setting

out procedures to comply with this constitutional right). See also Bearden v. Georgia, 461 U.S

660, 672-73 (1983) (jailing a probationer because he cannot pay a fine without considering her

ability to pay violates Fourteenth Amendment); Tate v. Short, 401 U.S. 395, 398 (1971) ("[T]he

Constitution prohibits the State from imposing a fine as a sentence and then automatically

converting it into a jail term solely because the defendant is indigent and cannot forthwith pay

the fine in full."); Frazier v. Jordan, 457 F.2d 726, 728-29 (5th Cir. 1972) (finding that an

alternative sentencing scheme of $17 dollars or 13 days in jail was unconstitutional as applied to those who cannot immediately pay a fine).

8.

In order to grant the relief Petitioner seeks, this Court need not consider the facts

surrounding her nonpayment or make any express finding about her inability to pay. Rather, the

2

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 3 of 31
fact that Petitioner said that she could not pay, coupled with the failure of the Municipal Court to make a meaningful inquiry into Petitioner's ability to pay, constitutes a violation under the Constitution and Rule 26.11 of the Rules of Criminal Procedure, and mandates that this Court quash the order of the Municipal Court.
9. Second: Because Petitioner was actually imprisoned on the charges against her, Petitioner was jailed in violation of her right to counsel, as she never knowingly and intelligently waived this right. See U.S. Const. amend. VI; Ala. Const. art. I, § 6; see also Scott v. Illinois, 440 U.S. 367, 373 (1979) (Because "actual imprisonment is a penalty different in kind from fines or the mere threat of imprisonment, . . actual imprisonment [is] the line defining the cônstittitional right to appointment of counsel" in nonfelony cases.).
10. Petitioner therefore asks that this Court issue a writ of certiorari and quash the order of the Municipal Court requiring Petitioner to serve the 31-day sentence, and declare that this order violates the U.S. and Alabama Constitutions and Alabama laW.
II. JURISDICTION
11. This COurt has jurisdiction of Petitioner's claim for declaratory relief under the Declaratory Judgment Act, Ala. Code § 6-6-222, and 42 U.S.C. § 1983, as Petitioner asks that this Court declare that the order and practice of the Municipal Court violates Alabama law and the Alabama and U.S. Constitutions. There is a justiciable controversy between the parties based on the order of confinement and practice of the Municipal Court to issue Such orders.
12. This COurt also has jurisdiction over this petition for a writ of certiorari. Petitioner Cleveland is appealing the decision of the Municipal Court to confine her in jail, long after the original conviction and sentence was imposed. For this reason, Section 12-14-70 of the Alabama Code, which provides for a direct appeal to the circuit court of a conviction by a
3

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 4 of 31
municipal court, appears to be inapplicable. Direct appeal under Section 12-14-70, which "was intended to provide an avenue by which criminal defendants... might enjoy and be guaranteed their. . . constitutional rights to trial before a jury," appears not to be implicated here, where Petitioner seeks only to challenge the court's unconstitutional modification of her sentence long after her original conviction. McDaniel v. State, 397 So.2d 237, 239 (Ala. Crim. App. 1981), writ denied sub nom. Exparte McDaniel, 397 So. 2d 239 (Ala. 1981).
13. Rather, where review in the nature of certiorari "would be considered eually effective and certainly less duplicitous," it has been deemed the proper method to challenge a post-conviction decision by a municipal court. Id. See also Essix v. City of Birmingham, 308 So. 2d 259, 260 (Ala. Crim. App. 1975) ("The supervisory power of the Circuit Court by way of certiorari is all that is afforded for review of orders" such as probation revocation entered by the municipal court.); Ala. Op. Atty. Gem No. 2002-036, 2001 WL 1421635 (Oct. 22, 2001) ("The proper appellate review of the revocation of probation by the district or the municipal court is a petition for writ of certiorari filed with the circuit court," and "[t]he circuit judge should review these petitions.").2
14. In the alternative, if a writ of certioriari is unavailable and the concurrently filed appeal is improper, this Court has jurisdiction over a writ of prohibition or mandamus. Exparte Owen Fed. Bank, FSB, 872 So. 2d 810, 813 (Ala. 2003) (writ of mandamus appropriate where the aggrieved party does not have "full and adequate relief" by appeal).
15. The petition was filed within a reasonable time, as it was filed within 14 days of the Municipal Court's order of confinement to jail.
2 Petitioner has also noticed an appeal in the Municipal Court within the time limit of 14 days from the Municipal
Court's order of confinement if this Court believes this to be the correct way to review the judgment. Ala. R. Crim. P. 30.3(a).
4

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 5 of 31
III. STATEMENT OF FACTS' A. Order of Incarceration 16. Petitioner Harriet Cleveland was ordered by the Municipal Court to be incarcerated in the Montgomery Municipal Jail for 54 days because of her failure to pay fines and fees on multiple traffic tickets. 17. Petitioner is a 49-year-old resident of Montgomery. She was arrested at her home on August 20, 2013, while babysitting her grandson. She was arrested and incarcerated for being unable to make payments on old traffic tickets in the amount of $1554. 18. Approximately two months earlier, Petitioner received a letter from the Office of the District Attorney of the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit of Alabama, notifying her that she owed $2714 in fines and fees on her traffic tickets. The letter states that she "MUST pay this amount in full within SEVEN (7) days Of the date of this notice or [she] may be ARRESTED." (emphasis in original). It does not give any other options if Petitioner cannot pay. 19. Petitioner spent one night in jail and appeared before The Honorable Milton J. Westry of the Montgomery Municipal Court on August 21, 2013. Judge Westry told Petitioner that she must serve 31 days in jail if she did not pay $1554 immediately. 20. Petitioner told Judge Westry that she previously did not have a job. She told him that, very recently, she had finally found a part-time job that would help her make money to pay the tickets. Judge Westry asked an agent of Judicial Correction Services ("JCS"), who Sits at the front of the courtroom, whether Petitioner was qualified for a payment plan, and the agent said no. Petitioner was returned to jail.
Petitioner previously verified the facts contained in the original Petition, which have not changed with this amendment except to reflect the fact that Petitioner has since been released from the Montgomery Municipal Jail.
hi

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 6 of 31
21. Petitioner heard Judge Westry give others the same option of paying fines or serving time in jail. When one woman said that she was unable to pay, he said that she must be jailed because of a policy that he must follow.
22. A copy of the transcript given to Petitioner, which details the court's disposition of each of these cases ,4 is attached to this Petition. Each case is listed as "commuted," and the judge's order to either pay the fine or spend 31 days in jail is detailed at the bottom of the order.
23. Petitioner has been told by many others that they also have been, or are currently, incarcerated because of their inability to pay fines.
B. Background
24. Petitioner incurred the traffic tickets on which she is currently jailed in 2008 and 2009, when a police roadblock was often set up in her neighborhood.
25. She was jailed at least twice in 2009 and 2010 on these tickets. When she told the judge at one hearing that she could not afford to pay because she was only able to find part-time work, he told her to find another job.
26. Petitioner was previously ordered to make payments of $140 per month to Judicial Correction Services ("JCS"), a private probation company. She paid what she could when she had the money, but never had the full $140 every month. The Municipal Court did not conduct a review of her financial situation or ability to make those large monthly payments.
27. Petitioner has been unable to find full-time work for years. Petitioner lost her full time job at a daycare in 2009, and was able to obtain only a part time job over the next year until she was again laid off. Since that time, she has made some money for daily necessities by babysitting and by renting out two rooms of her home to strangers. Very recently, Petitioner was
4 The case numbers are 2008TRT029308; 2009TRT022302; 2009TRT034595; 2009TRT035054; 2009TRT047492; 2009TRT095474; 2009TRT095475; and 2009TRT1 06724.
RI

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 7 of 31
able to obtain a part-tithe job cleaning a daycare. However, after years without a full-time job, she is still left without resources to pay for daily necessities. She filed for bankruptcy in June 2013.
28. Under her Chapter 13 plan, she must make monthly payments of $250.00, which she is unable to do while she is in jail and unable to work. She also believes that she will lose her cleaning job as well as her babysitting jobs while she is forced to stay in jail and miss work for over a month.
IV. STATEMENT OF ISSUES 29. Should the order of the Municipal Court be quashed or declared to be in violation of Alabama law and the U.S. and Alabama Constitutions because of the Municipal Court's failure to make a meaningful inquiry into Petitioner's inability to pay and her indigency, thereby subjecting her to incarceration because of her inability to pay in violation of the equal protection and due process clauses? 30. Should the order of the Municipal Court be quashed or declared to be in violation of Alabama law and the U.S. and Alabama Constitutions because of the Municipal Court's failure to appoint counsel for Petitioner or obtain a waiver of this right? V. STATEMENT WHY WRIT SHOULD ISSUE AND WHY DECLARATORY RELIEF SHOULD BE
GRANTED 31. Petitioner is unlawfully incarcerated because of her indigence and inability to pay her fines, in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution; Article I, Sections 1, 6, and 22 of the Alabama Constitution; and Rule 26.11 of the Alabama Rules of Criminal Procedure.
7

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 8 of 31
32. She is also unlawfully incarcerated in violation of her right to counsel under the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 6 of the Alabama Constitution.
33. On a petition for a common-law writ of certiorari, the Court is "responsible for reviewing the record to ensure that the fundamental tights of the parties, including the right to due process, had not been violated." Franks v. Jordan, 55 So. 3d 1218, 1220-21 (Ala. Civ. App. 2010) (quoting Evans v. City of Huntsville, 580 So.2d 1323, 1325 (Ala.1991)). "The appropriate office of the writ is to correct errors of law apparent on the face of the record,.. . and the only matter to be determined is the quashing or the affirmation of the proceedings brought up for review." Id. (quoting City of Birmingham v. Southern Bell Tel. & Tel. Co., 82 So. 519, 520 (Ala. 1919)).
34. This Court should exercise its "supervisory power. by way of certiorari" to protect the rights of Petitioner and ensure that the Municipal Court understands its duties and the rights of all criminal defendants under the United States and Alabama Constitutions. Essix, 308 So. 2d at 260.
35. The Court may also declare this order and practice to be in violation of Alabama law and the U.S. and Alabama Constitutions under Ala. Code § 6-6-222 and 42 U.S.C. § 1983.
A. Due Process and Equal Protection 36. The Municipal Court violated Petitioner's due process and equal protection rights
by failing to make a meaningful inquiry into her ability to pay and sentencing her to serve a jail term simply because of her inability to pay the fines and fees imposed..
37. The U.S. Supreme Court has consistently held that courts violate the Fourteenth Amendment by treating indigent criminal defendants differently than those who are able to pay.
8

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 9 of 31
See Bearden v. Georgia, 461 U.S. 660, 672-73 (1983) (to "deprive a probationer of her conditional freedom simply because, through no fault of her own he cannot pay a fine. . would be contrary to the fundamental fairness required by the Fourteenth Amendment"); Tate v. Short, 401 U.S. 395 (1971) (holding that to imprison a defendant who was unable to pay a fine violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment); Williams v. Illinois, 399 U.S. 235, 241 (1970) ("reaffirm[ing] allegiance to the basic command that justice be applied equally to all persons"); Douglas v. California, 372 U.S. 353, 355 (1963) (denouncing the "evil" of "discrimination against the indigent"); Griffin v. Illinois, 351 U.S. 12, 19 (1956) ("There can be no equal justice where the kind of trial a man gets depends on the amount of money be has.").
38. In Tate, the Supreme Court adopted the view that "the Constitution prohibits the State from imposing a fine as a sentence and then automatically converting it into a jail term solely because the defendant is indigent and cannot forthwith pay the fine in full." Tate v. Short, 401 U.S. 395, 398 (1971). This is true "whether or not the fine is accompanied by a jail term." Id. It noted that the State may constitutionally resort to other alternatives in Order to serve its valid interest in enforcing payment of fines, such as imposing installment plans. Id. at 399-400.
39. In Bearden, the United States Supreme Court reversed the trial court's probation revocation based on the defendant's failure to pay fines and restitution, because the court did not first determine that the defendant had the ability to pay. The Bearden Court held,:
[I]n revocation proceedings for failure to pay a fine or restitution, a sentencing court must inquire into the reasons for the failure to pay if the probationer willfully refused to pay or failed to make sufficient bona fide effOrts legally to acquire the resources to pay, the court may revoke probation and sentence the defendant to imprisonment within the authorized range of its sentencing authority. If the probationer could not pay despite sufficient bona fide efforts to acquire the resources to do so, the court must consider alternative measures to punishment other than imprisonment. Only if alternate measures are not adequate to meet the

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 10 of 31
State's interests in punishment and deterrence may the court imprison a probationer who has made sufficient bona fide efforts to pay.5 Bearden, 461 U.S. at 672. 40. The former Fifth Circuit explicitly held that an alternative sentencing scheme, such as that used by the Municipal Court in this case, was unconstitutional as applied to those who were unable to pay the fine at once. See Frazier v. Jordan, 457 F.2d 726, 727 (5th Cir. 1972) (ending, based on the Supreme Court's decisions in Williams and Tate, that an alternative sentencing scheme of $17 dollars or 13 days in jail was unconstitutional as applied to indigent defendants). 41. The Court of Criminal Appeals similarly has made clear that, "[i]n revocation proceedings for failure to pay fines, restitution, court costs, or supervision fees, the trial court should inquire into the reasons for the failure to pay and make Specific detrminatiotis and findings in accordance with Bearden v. Georgia," including findings, "supported by the evidence, that defendant willfully refused to pay; that he failed to make sufficient bona fide efforts to pay; or, in the event of a showing of sufficient efforts to pay, that alternative measures to punish and deter are inadequate." Snipes v. State, 521 So.2d 89, 90-91 (Ala. Crim. App. 1986). 42. Rule 26.11 of the Alabama Rules of Criminal Procedure also purports to establish procedures "consistent with the United States Supreme Court's holding in Tate v. Short." Committee Comments, Ali. R. Crim. P. 26.11. It mandates that "[un no case shall an indigent
The Supreme Court has rejected three reasons offered to show why imprisonment was required to further penal goals. First, the state's interest in "ensuring that restitution be paid to the victims" is insufficient, because
[r]evoking the probation of someone who through no fault of his own is unable to make restitution will not make restitution suddenly forthcoming Bearden 461 U S at 670 Similarly, the state ',s interest in removing a defendant from the temptation of committing other crimes in order to protect society and rehabilitate him is also insufficient as this would amount to "little more than punishing a person for her poverty." Id. at 671. Finally, although the state's interest in punishment and deterrence of others is a valid interest it can be served fully by alternative means including extending the time for making payments reducing the fine or directing that the probationer perform labor or public service in lieu of the fine. Id. at 671-72.
10

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 11 of 31
defendant be incarcerated for inability to pay a fine or court costs or restitution." Ala. R. Cnm. P. 26.11 (1)(2). Moreover, "[i]ncarceration should be employed only after the court has examined the reasons for nonpayment," including "consideration of the defendant's situation, means, and conduct with regard to the nonpayment of the fine and/or restitution." Id. 26.11 (i)(1). Thus, the court must consider the financial situation of any defendant and her ability to pay before ordering incarceration.
43. Rule 26.11 provides other remedies for a defendant's failure to pay, including (1) reducing the fine to an amount the defendant is able to pay; (2) continuing or modifying the schedule of payments; (3) ordering an employer to withhold wages; or (4) releasing the defendant from an obligation to pay the fine. Id. 26.11(h).
44. In the instant case, the Municipal Court failed to conduct even a cursory review of Petitioner's ability to repay her fines or her bona fide efforts to acquire the money to pay. It thus failed in its affirmative duty to inquire into ability to pay, as required by Rule 26.11 and Bearden.
45. The Municipal Court should not have a policy requiring incarceration when individuals cannot pay their fines. It may not categorically determine that failure to meet any previously imposed payment plans justifies an alternative sentence of immediate payment or mandatory incarceration, especially when the previous payment plans involved a rninimtirn monthly payment far beyond the means of Petitioner. Under Rule 26.11 and the Alabama and U.S. Constitutions, the court is still required to determine the reasons for the inability to pay and whether Petitioner is indigent before imposing a sentence that mandates incarceration for failure to pay.
11

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 12 of 31
46. This Court need not consider the facts surrounding Petitioner's nonpayment and make an express finding that Petitioner did not have the ability to pay order to grant the relief requested. Rather, Petitioner's inability to pay the fine immediately coupled with the failure of the Municipal Court to meaningfully inquire into Petitioner's ability to pay constitutes a violation under the Alabama and U.S. Constitutions and Rule 26.11, and mandates that this Court quash the order of the Municipal Court.
B. Right to Counsel 47. Petitioner was sentenced to incarceration without being provided With counsel or
waiving this right, in violation of the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 6 of the Alabama Constitution.
48. Because "actual imprisonment is a penalty different in kind from fines or the more threat of imprisonment, . . . actual imprisonment [is] the line defining the constitutional right to appointment of counsel" in nonfelony cases Scott V. IllinOis, 440 U.S. 367, 373 (1979); see also Alabama v. Shelton, 535 U.S. 654, 662 (2002).
49. "In Order to waive the right to counsel, the record must show, or there must be an allegation and evidence which show, that an accused was offered counsel but intelligently and understandingly rejected the offer." Ex parte Shelton, 851 So. 2d 96, 101 (Ala. 2000), affd sub nom. Alabama v. Shelton, 535 U.S. 654 (2002). A knowing and intelligent waiver requires: "1) that the defendant was informed that he had the right to counsel, 2) that the defendant was informed that if he could not afford counsel the state would appoint counsel to represent him, and 3) an affirmative showing by the defendant that, understanding these tights, he still elects to proceed without counsel." Id.
12

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 13 of 31
50. At the hearing on August 21, Petitioner was actually incarcerated on the Municipal Court's order. She was not provided with appointed counsel, and did not waive her right to counsel.
WHEREFORE, Petitioner respectfully prays for relief as follows: A. Promptly grant the writ of certiorari or, in the alternative, mandamus; B. Find and declare that the Municipal Court's order constitutes a violation of the due process clause, equal protection clause, and/or the right to counsel provisions of the Alabama or U.S. Constitutions; and C. Quash the order of confinement ordering Petitioner to the Montgomery Municipal Jail in violation of her constitutional rights.
Dated this 18th day of September, 2013.
Respectfully submitted, /s/ Sara Zampierin Sara Zampierin (Bar No. ZAM002) Southern Poverty Law Center 400 Washington Avenue Montgomery, Alabama 36104 Telephone: (334) 956-8200 Fax: (334) 956-8481 Email: sara.zampierin@splcenter.org Attorney for Petitioner
13

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM
MANDATORY TIME RELEASE DA7I: COMD TIME RELEASE NAT

Document 1-2
. ..

Filed 10/04/13 Page 14 of 31

I - UfI1t

ELECTRONICALI Y FILED 9í1 S 2013 1 :2( I\f
(L \ -2OI3-9O44J CIR('T IT OF RI OF

III I-ANY B. \IL(ORi), CT ERK

MANCRYT PR&PSAUD BVi L

MONTGOMERY MUNICIPAL.COURT - STATE OF ALABAMA

)ATK&TTh4B: 8/20/2013 18AOb.:2o3OO816t

NAMB:HA1UM3TDLEVELAN.0

.

.

g•.

RACE 3

SEX P

1)03'

SSN

ADDESS 326.E QODN. JT1OMV6 AL61O5 -

-

• cIL1wDEscauvT1oN

r.

--- -

CAS# . •. COURT DISPOSITION OF CASE

--

-.

•__-

-.

I
-. WSURANCE

PROOF OF

- ___.

--

NQOP
• 3

2-O-O--9-I-T-O--3554 CO- M---M--U- T- E-.D•, O--N--.$16.00

----

2008ThT0$308 COMMUTEXON$fl9OO

-•-.-•,--- ___.________._.__,-..__.1

.---. -.--.---- l,___, --J- .--

.- -

_-.--- -•,-_._- •- -•--

2009T1TO33D2 COMMUTED 014

_-_J-_-__•_L__.

-

__j.•

•••_-

••4•-

•__•••_

•

••_•_•

-.-.

.

••_

DRIVING W/

20001RT047492 'COMMUTED ON 62900

-- . .— -- ----- •.i•&.__ .. .

_u-.--- ..

.-:-.•

ooFor
INSU

24o9To34s95COMMUTED ON $400

-

.-----

—

6 1)Riv1NLQQBL zoto* _______•__•_•_•L _$• *,_____•1 ___-___.-L -.- I... C •*•tW -. 1N - S

/R1VTNQ WI

óO9TRTO9544 COM?UTD QN $27OO

iwp OVA

2009TRT095475 COMMUTED ON $17900

e I
All
(I

/ tb

fit

TT DEFENDANT -

! Ai

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM

Document 1-2 offiteg of

Filed 10/04/13 Page 15 of 31
FT F1O1C HYFT[FD 18/201 1:'0 PM
U ( V 21 01494 CIRCUiT COURT OF MON!(iUNIERY CO1NFY, \1 ARAMA TIFFANY B. \IC(ORD, ('LERK

DARYLD. BAILEY RH TWA B CAPE JERRYSNA. 00DSW0RTH
CHIEF

IEritt Attarop
ftIIth 3jubittat Circuit of [abama
MONTGOMERY COUNTY COURTHOUSE 251 SOUTH LAWRENCE STREET P.O. BOX 1667.
MONTGOMERY, ALABAMA 36102-1667
June 24, 2013

(334)241-2455 FAX (334) 241-2332

Harriet Delores Cleveland 326 Ogden,Avenue Montgomery, AL 36105
RE: Case N64 N2241 591. N1955864, N2239427, N286475 1, N2826652, N3348720, N2849160, N2849161 Charge: NO INSURANCE, NO INSURANCE, NO INSURANCE, SUSPENDED LICENSE, NO INSURANCE, NO LICENSE, SUSPENDED LICENSE, NO INSURANCE

Balance Due: $2,714.00
According to City of Montgomery records, you have failed to pay Al court ordered monies in the abovedescribed case(s). This case(s) has been turned over to the DISTRICT ATTORNEY for collection under Section 12-17-225 et seq. of the Code of Alabama.
You are hereby .notified that you owe the amount you failed to pay plus the collection fee. Your balance due is stated above.
You MUST pay this amount in full within SEVEN (7) days of the dale of this notice or you may be ARRESTED
You, may pay by mail by sending a money order or a cashier's check to the Montgomery Municipal Court, P.O. Box 159 Montgomery, Alabama 36101-0159. Cash and personal checks are NOT accepted. Please enclose a copy of this notice with you payment.
You may make you payment by visiting www.montzomeryaltiLcom or by phone using a credit.card by calling (888) 912-1522 or (334) 625-2777. Please have this notice with you.
You may pay in person at the Montgomery Municipal Court, 320 North Ripley Street, Montgomery, Alabama by cash, money order, , cashier's check, personal check or credit card. Please bring this notice with you.
If you have any questions, you may contact me at (334) 625-2455. Thank you.
Sincerely,
Ellen Brooks District Attorney
BY: Michelle Rivers Stewart Restitution Recovery Officer

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 16 of 31

8/28/13

2009TRT035054 - CITY OF MONTGOMERY s. CLEVELAND. H

ELECTRONICALLY ILFO 9/18/2013 1:20 PNI
ftT;-( v 2013-901404.I

[RTITCOURI OF

40NTG M1 R'{COUINTY, ALABAMA

Case Details - Summary

\N B. MCCORD. CLERK

2009TRT03 5054 CITY OF MONTGOMERY vs. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

Judge: MUNICIPAL JUDGE

Case Type: Traffic

Case Number: 2009TRT035054

Uniform Case Number:

Clerk File Date: 511312009

Statusflate: 511312009.

SAO Case Number: AL0030100

Total Fees Due: 16.00

Agency: MONTGOMERY POLICE DEPARThEt4T Agency Report #- N2241591

Status: COMMUTED Custody Location:

PARTIES

TYPE

PARTY NAME

DEFENDANT CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

OFFICER

MCCORD, TMANE LATEZ

PLA11FF CITY OFMONTGOMERY

IATTORNEY

CHARGES COUNT DESCRIPTION I FAIL POSSESS/DISPLAY INS (ISTOFFENSE) (324 A- 1 6(1))

LEVEL DEGREE PLEA DISPOSITION GUILTY

DISPOSITION DATE 0610112012

EVENTS DATE 8121120138:00AM 312312010 8:00 AM 2/1120I08:0OAM 10/19/2009 8:00 716/2009 8:00 AM 6/8/2009 8:00 AM

EVENT JAIL JAIL TP-LOOKLI! JAIL DAILY DAILY

IJUDGE WESTRY, MILTON J WtUNICIPALJUDGE MUNICIPAL-JUDGE MUNICIPALJUDGE MUNICIPALJUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE

JIOCATIOM MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAINCOURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM

SULT
CANCELLED coN-r CONT CONT CONT

CASE HISTORY
CASE NUMBER

[CiHARGE DESCRIPTION

CASE STATUS ..JDISP0SITION jOUTSTANDING AMOUNT No Additional Cases

CASE DOCKETS
rke
1 812112013

j
TRANSCRIPT

812012013 JAIL COURI SET FOR 08/21/2013 AT 8:00 AM IN MAIN COURTROOM

6/24/2013 ALIAS WARRANTS STATUS SET TO ICALLED ON 0612412013

6124/2013 COLLECTION

6124/2013 JAIL

NEXT EVENT JALERTS

1/2

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 17 of 31

8/2&/13 6/24/2013

2009TRT035054- CITY OF MONTGOMERY w. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D WARMNTNUM5ER: 13201339328

6/24/2013 ALIAS WARRANTS STATUS SET TO OUTSTANDING ON 06/24/2013

8/16/2012 ARCHIVED RECORDS

8/16/2012 REVOCATION LETTER

6/1/2012

PAYMENT $1.00 RECEIPTä20I26479I6

6/1/2012

CASE CLOSED

6/1/2012

CAS02009TRT035054-SENTENCED: 6/1/2012 IMPOSLD: 6/1/2012 EFFECtiVE DATE: 6/1/2012

6/1/2012

DEFENDANT ENTERED PLEA OF GUI LTY.SEQ1

6/1/2012

GUILTY SEQ:1

3/9/2012

PAYMENT $152.00 RECEIPT #2012018929

3/23/2010 Court date/ttrrE: 03/23/2010 - 13:00.

3/23/2010 Ileartng Type changed fromTP to J.

3/2212010 Report Subntted; CAR ASWI

11/6/2009 CoUrt date/time: 02/011/2D10 - 08:30.

11/612009 Hearing Type changed from J toTP.

10/19(2009 Courtte/tinE: 10/19/2009-08:30.

10/1912009 Hearing Type changed from D to J.

10/19/2009 Report -Submitted: ALIAS WI

6/29(2009 Court date/tine: 07/002009 - 08:30.

5/13fl009 Case Statusentered as P. 5/1312009 Hearing Type entered as V. 5/1312009 Courtdate/tirr: 06/08/2009 - 08:30.

2'2

8/28/13

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 18 of 31
2008TRT029308 - CITY OF MONTGOMERY 'es. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

Case Details - Summary
2008TRT029308 CITY OF MONTGOMERY vs. CLEVELAND. HARRIET D

MARY

Judge MUNICIPAL JUDGE

Case Type: Traffic

Case Number: 2008TRT029308

UnifOrm Case Nunther

Clerk File Date: 5/12/2008 SAO Case Number: AL0030I00

Status Date: 5/12/2008 Total Fees Due: 179.00

Agency: MONTGOMERY POLICE DEPARTMENT Agency Report#: N1955864

Status: COMMUTED Custody Location:

PARTIES

TYPE

PARTY NAME]rro RN El

DEFENDANT CLEVELAND, HARRIET I)

OFFICER BRADLEY, TIMOTHY A

PLAINTIFF CITY OF MONTGOMERY

-

-

CHARGES COUNT DESCRIPTION 1 FAIL POSSESS/DISPLAY INS. (1ST OFFENSE) (32-7A-16(1))

LEVEL DEGREE PLEA DISPOSITION DISPOSITION DATE

EVENTS DATE
/21/2013 8:00 AM 3/23/2010 800 AM 2/1/20108 00 AM 10/19/2009 800 AM 7/6/2009 8:00 AM 61812009 B-00 Am 4/20/20098 00 AM 6/911008 8:00 AM

-

-

EVENT

JAIL

JAIL TP LODKUP

JAIL DAILY

DAILY

DAILY NON-COURTTRAFFIC

IJUDGE!LOCATION

WESTRY, MILTON J

MAIN COURTROOM

MUNICIPAL JUDGE

MAIN COURTROOM

MUNICIPAL JUDGE

MAIN COURTROOM

MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUCIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE

MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM

1RESULT
CONT CONT CONT CONT CONT - CONT

CASE HISTORY CASE NUMBER

HARGE;ESCRIPTION

CASE D0CKE75

jCASE STATUS IDISPOSITION No Additional Cases

DATE 8121/2013

ENTRY TRANSCRIPT

8/20/2013 JAIL COURI SET FOR OB/21/2013AT8:OOAMIN MAIN COURTROOM

6/24/2013 ALIAS WARRANTS STATUS SET TO RECALLED 0N06/24/2013

6/2412013 COLLECTIONIIT1ER

6/24/2013 JAIL SUMMARY SHEET ecotr1gomgmi'BerxthnrKwb/CourtCase.aspQ'DetaIIsPrInt/827109

STANDING AMOUNT

TNEXT EVENT JALERTS

1/2

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 19 of 31

&is

2008TRT029308- crrv OF MONTGOMERY w. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

6/1412013 ALIAS WARRANT

611412013 WRRAI4TNUMBER: 13201339329

61244013 ALIAS WARRANTS STATUS SET TO OUTSTANDING ON 06124/2013

8/16/2012 ARCHIVED RECORDS

8/16/2012

REV0CA11ON LETTER

3/23/2010 Court date/tin: 03/23/2010 - 13:00.

3i23i201 0 Hearing Type changed fromTP to J.

3/23/2010 Warrant #008A29308 8/13/2008 Canceled.

3122/2010 Report Subntted: CAPIASWI

-11/0009 Court date/turn: 02/01/2010 -08:30.

11/64009 HearIng Type changed frorni to TP.

10/19/2009 Court date/time: 10/19/2009• 08:30.

10/19/2009 Homing TypO changed from D to J.

6/29/2009 Court date/tlrrn: 07/06/2009 - 08:30.

6/2/2009

Case Status changed from R`(. to P.

5/15/2009 Case status changed from P to RC.

4/1612009 Hearing Type changed fronilto D.

4116/2009 Court date/time: 04/20/2009 - 08:30.

4/16/2009 Case Status changed from CAP toP.

8/13/2008 Warrant #0084029308 8/13/2008 issued. 8/13/2008 Case StátUs-chänged from P to CAP. 5/12/2008 Hearing Type entered as T. 5/12/2008 Case Status entered as P.

22

a'2a'13

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 20 of 31
2009TRT022302- CITY OF MONTGOMERY'e. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

Case Details - Summary
2009TRT022302 CITY OF MONTGOMERY vs. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

SUM4RY

Judge: MUNICIPAL JUDGE

Case Type: Traffic

Case Number: 2009TRTD22302

Uniform Case Number:

Clerk File Date: 3/17/2009

Status Date: 3/1712009

SAO Case Number: AL0030100

Total Fees Due: 52.00

Agency: MONTGOMERY POLICE DEPARTMENT Agency Report#: N2239427

Status: COMMUTED Custody Locaon:

PARTIES

TYPE

PARTY NAME

DEFENDANT CLEVELAND, HAM ETD OFFICER FLEMING, RICHARD L PLAJ Nil FF CITY OF MONTGOMERY

ATTORNEY

CHARGES COUNT DESCRIPTION 1 FAIL POSSESS/DISPLAY INS. (2ND OFFENSE) (32-7A.16(2))

LEVEL DEGREE PLEA DISPOSITION DISPOSITION DATE

EVENTS DATE 8/21/20138:00AM 3/23/20108:06AM 2/1/20108:O0AM 1O/19/2309B:0OM 716/20098,00 AM 6/8/2009 8;00 AM 5/25/20098:OOAM

EVENT JAIL JAIL TP-LOOKUP JAIL DAILY DAILY NON-COURTTRAFFIC

JUDGE WESTRY, MILTON J MUNICI PAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPALJ.JDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE

JLOCATiON.ESULT

WJNCOURTR0OM

MAI N COURTROOM

MAINCOURTROOM

CONT

WJNCOUTROOM

CONT

MAIN COURTROOM

MAINCOURTROOM

--

MAIN COURTROOM

COHT CONT CONT

HISTORY NUMBER

ICHARGE. DESCRIPTION

ICASESTATUS (DISPOSITION [OUTSTANDING AMOUNT No Additional Cases

INEXT EVENT jERTS

1/2

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 21 of 31

8/13 6/24/2013

ALIAS WARRAiff

2009TRT02Z302- CITY OF MONTGOMERY s. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

6/24/2013 WARRANT NUMBER: 13201339331

024/2013

ALIAS WMRM'T5 STATUS SET TO OUTSTANDING 0N66/2412th3

= 8/16/2012 ARCHIVED RECORDS

8/16/2012

REVOCA110N LETTER

3/9/2012

PAYMENT $217.06 RECEIPT 02012019159

3/23/2010 Court date/time: 63/23120110-- 13:00.

3123/2010 HearingType changed fromTPtoJ.

3122/2010 Report Submitted: CAPIASWI

3/22/2010 Report SilbrTlltted: CAPIASWI

11/6/2009 Court date/time: 02101/2010 - 08:30.

11/612009 Hearing type changed from Jto TP.

10/19/2009 Court date/tini: 10/19/2009- 08:30.

10/19/2009 Herfng Type changed from 0 to J.

10/1912009 Report Submltted: ALIAS WI

61291200

Court date/time: 07106/2009 - 08:30.

6/2/2009

Court date/time: 06108/2009 - 08:30

6/2/2009

Hearing Type changed fromTto D.

311712009 Hearing Type entered as T

311712009 Case Status entered as P.

212

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 22 of 31

2W13

2009TRT047492- CITY OF MONTGOMERY w. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

Sack

Case Details - Summary
2009TRT047492 CtTY OF MONTGOMERY vs. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

Judge: MUNICIPAL JUDGE

Case Type. Traffic

Case Number: 2009TRT047492

Uniform Case Number;

Clerk File Date: 6/5/2009

Status Date: ' 6/5/2009

SAO Case Number: AL0030100

Total Fees Due; 629.00

Agency: MONTGOMERY POLICE DEPAMENT

Agency Raport# N2864751

Status: COMMUTED Location:

PARTIES
TYPE IPARTY NAME
DEFENDANT CLEVELAND, IIARRILT D OFFICER RODRIGJEZ, PAUL RICKY PLAJNI1FF CITY OF MONTGOMERY

jATTORNEY

CHARGES

COUNT DESCRIPTION

-

1 DRIVING WHILE SUSPENDED (32-6-19)

LEVEL DEGREE PLEA DISPOSITION

DISPOSITION DATE

EVENTS
DATE

EVENT

V21/20138:00AM

JAIL

3/23/20108:60 AM JAIL

2/1/2010800 AM

1? LOOKUP

10/19/2009 8:00AM

JAIL

7/6/2009 8:00 AM

DAILY

JUDGE
WESTRY, MILTON J MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE MIJNICIPALJUDGE

JrION
MAJNCOURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAiN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAJNCOURTROOM

IRESULT --
-
CONT CONT CONT

CASE HISTORY
CASE NUMBERiKARGg DESCRIPTION

CASE STATUS DISPOSITIONOUTSTANDING AMOUNT
No Additional Cases

VxT EVENT 1ALERTS

106859

1/2

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 23 of 31

8128/13

2009TRTO4749,2n CITY OF MONTGOMERY %a. CLEVELAND, HARRIET P

612412013 WARRANT NUMBER 13201339332

6/24I1013 ALIAS WARRAN1s STATUS SET TOO1rrsTNDIMGoNo6/24/2013

811612012 ARCHIVED RECORDS

8116/2012 REVOCATION LETIER

312312010 Court date/time: 0312312010- 1300.

3/2312010 Hearing Type changed fromTPtoJ.

3/22/2010 Report Submitted: CAPIASWI

11/612009 Court date/tine: 02/01/2010 - 08:30.

11/6/2009 Hearing Type changed from to W.

10/1912009 10119/2009

ReportSubnittecl: ALIAS WI Hearing Type changed from DtoJ.

10/1912009 Court date/tine: 10/19/2009 - 08:30.

6/5/2009

HearIng Type entered as D.

615I669

Case Status entered as P.

ecoutt.mongomeri.goenchnwI'Web'CourtCase.aspxVetaJIsPrinU11D0859

212

828/13

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 24 of 31
2009TRT034595- CITY OF MONTGOMERYs. CLEVELAND, HARRIET 1) Back Irict

Case Details - Summary
2009TRT034595 CITY OF MONTGOMERY vs. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

Judge: MUNI C I PAL JUDGE

Case Type: Traffic

Case Number 2009TRT034595

Uniform Case Number:

Clerk File Date: 5/712009

Status Date: 517/2009

SAO Case Number: AL0030100

Total Fees Due: 16.00

Agency: MONTGOMERY POLICE DEPARTMENT Agency Report #. N2826652

Status: COMMUTED Custody Location:

PARTIES

TYPE

PARTY NAME

DEFENDANT CLEVELAND, HARRIETD OFFICER DONIVER, CLARENCE MARTIN PLAiNTIFF CITY OF MONTGOMERY

1ATT0R)EY -

CHARGES COUNT DESCRIPTION I FAIL POSSESS/DISPLAY INS. (IST OFFENSE) (32.7A-16(1))

- LEVEL DEGREE PLEA DISPOSITION GUIL1Y

DISPOSON DATE 03109120!2

EVENTS

DATEIEVENT

8/2112013800AM

JAIL

3/23I20108:00M

JAIL

2/1/2010 8:00 AM

TP-LOOKUP

10119120098 ODAM

JAIL

7/15/20098 00 AM

DAILY

6/8/2009 8:00 NA

DAILY

5/25/20098:00 AM DAiLY

7/6/2006 8:00 AM

- DAILY

fJUDGE WESTR' MILTON MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUN1CIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE

ILOCATION MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM

,]ESIJLT
CANCELLED CONT COPIT CONT CONT CONI' CONT

CASE HISTORY CASE NUTFHARGE DESCRIPTION
CASE DOCKETS

ICASE STATUS JDISPOSITION 1OUTSTAKDING AMOUNT NoAddttlonaLCases

DATE 8/2112013

TRANSCRIPT

8/2012013 JAIL COURTSET FOR68/2112013 AT8:O0 AM 114 MAIN COURTROOM

6124/2013 ALIAS WARRANTS5TA1USSETTO RECALLED 01,106/24/2013

6/2412013 COLLECTION LETTER

6/24/201

JAILSUM#iARY SHEET

JNEXT EVENT IALERTS
112

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 25 of 31
2009TRT034595- CITY OF MONTGOMERY vs. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

6/2412013 ALIAS WARRANT 6/24/2013 WARRANT NUMBER: 13201339333 6/244013 - ALtASWAA{P STATUS SET TOOLJTSTANDING0N06/24/2013

8/1612012 ARCHIVED RECORDS

8/16/2012 REVOCATION LETTER

3/9/2912

PAYMENT$153.00 RECEIPT#2012018927

3/912012

CASE CLOSED

3/9/2012

CAE# 2009TR1034595 - SENTENCED: 3/9/2012 IMPOSED: 3/9/2012 EFFECTIVE DATE: 3/9/2012

3/9/2012

DEFENDANT ENTERED PLEA OF GUILTY SEQI

3/9/2012

GUILTY SEOjI

3/234010 Court date/ time: 03/23/2010- 13:00.

3/23/2010 Hearing Type.changed fromTP to J.

3/22/2010 Report Subtdtted: CAPASWI

3/22/2010 Report Submitted: CAP] SWI

11/6/2009 Court date/time: 02/0112010- 0:30.

1116/2009 Hearing Type changed fromitoW.

10/1912009 Court dateltirrie: 10119/2009-08:30.

10/19/2009 Hearing Type changed from D to J.

10/19120O9 Report Submitted: ALIAS WI

6/29/2009 Court date/tirre: 07106/2006 -08:30.

6/2/2009

Court date/time: 06/08/2009 - 08:30.

5/12/2009 Court date/tIme: 07/15/2009-08:30.

5/7/2009

Case Status entered as P.

- -

511/2069

Hearing T' ype enteredas D.

2/2

awl a

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 26 of 31
2009TRT106724 - CITY OF MONTGOMERY vs.. CLEVELAND. HARRIET D Back 1 ftint ®

Case Details - Summary
2009TRT106724 CITY OF MONTGOMERY vs. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

SUMMARY

Judge: MUNICIPAL JUDGE

Case Type: Traffic

Case Nuniber 2009TRTI 06724

Uniform Case Number:

Clerk File Date: 11/18/2009

Status Date: 11/184009

SAO Case Nurnber ,AL00301 00

Total Fees Due: 204.00

Agency: MONTGOMERY POLICE DEPARTMENT Agency Report N3348720

Status: COMMUTED Custody Location:

PARTIES

TYPE

PARTY NAME

DEFENDANT CLEVELAND, 1-IARRIEr 0

OFFICER PETERSON JOSEPH FREDRICK

PLAINTIFF Clii OF MONTGOMERY

ATTORNEY

CHARGES COUNT DESCRIPTION I NO DRIVER LICENSE (32-6-1)

LEVEL DEGREE

PLEA DISPOSITION

DISPOSITION DATE

EVENTS

DATE

jEVENT

8/21/2013 8:00 AM

JAIL

3/23/2010 8:00 AM

JAIL

12/16/20098:00 AM NON COUTRAFFIC

11/3012009800AM DAILY

--7 WESTRY, MILTONJ MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE

LOCATIONRESULT

MAIN COURTROOM

MAIN COURTROOM

MAIN COURTROOM

CONT

MAIN COURTROOM

COW

CASE HISTORY CASE NUMBER

JCHARGE DESCRIPTION

-

{CASE STATUS

DISPOSITION

No MdItlonM Cases

OUTSTANDING AMOUNT

fNEXT EVENT IALERTS

ecirUitgthl.gcBehchrkCótrtCase.asp'DetaI1sPrInV1561729

1/2

8(28/13

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 27 of 31

CITY

2009TRT106724 -

OF MONTGOMERY %a. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

6124/2013 ALIAS WARRANTS STA11JS SET TO OUTSTANDING ON 0612412013

8/16/2012 ARCHIVED RECORDS

8116/2012

REVOCA11ON LETTER

3/23/2010 Wariant #00M06fl4 111212010 Canceled.

3/23/2010 Court date/time: 03123/2010 - 13:00.

3/23/2010

4asrthg T/pe changed fromT to J.

3123/2010 Case Status changed from CAP to P.

3/22/2010

Report Subnitted: ALIAS WI

1/1212010 Warrant #009A106724 1/12/2010 issued.

1/12/2010 Case Status changed from Pto CAP.

11125/2009 Court date/tine: 11/30/2009-08:30.

11/25/2009 Hearing Type changed from T to D.

111181260 Hearing Type entered asl.

11/18/2009 Case Status entered as P.

2(2

M13

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 28 of 31
2009TRT095474- CrTYOF MONTGOMERY'e. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

Case Details - Summary
2009TRT095474 CITY OF MONTGOMERY vs. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

SUMMARY

Judge: MUNICIPAL JUDGE

Case Type: Traffic

Cafe Number 2009TRT095474

Uniform Case Number:

Clerk File Date: 10/22/2009

Status Date: 10/22/2009

SAO Case Number AL0030I00

Total Fees Due: 279.00

Agency: MONTGOMERY POLICE DEPARTMENT Agency Report #. N2849160

Status: COMMUTED Custody Location:

PARTIES

TYPE

PARTY NAME -

DEFENDANT CLEVELAND,HARRJErD

OFFICER DAVIS, CAMARAM

PLAINTIFF CITY OF MONTGOMERY

ATTORNEY

CHARGES COUNT DESCRIPTION 1 DRIVING WHILE-SUSPENDED (32.649)

LEVEL DEGREE PLEA msPosmoN

DISPOSITION DATE

EVENTS DATE 812112013 8:00 AM 3/23/20108:00AM 11/30/2009 8:D0 Al/I

JT
JAIL JAIL DAILY

JJUDGE
WESTRY,-MI LION J MUNICIPALJLJDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE

OCATIOH MAIN COURTROOM MAJNCOURTROOM MAI N COURTROOM

RESULT
CONT

CASE HISTORY N UMBER

RGE DESCRIPTION _.cE STATUS 1DISPOSITION 'OUTSTANDING AMOUNT No Additional Cases

CASE DOCKETS DATE 8/21/2013

ENTRY TRANSCRIPT

8/2012013 JAIL COURTSET F0R0812112013 AT 8:00 AM IN MAIN COUITROOM

6/24/2013 ALIAS WARRANTS STATUS-SETTO RECALLED ON 06124/2013

6124/2013 COLLECTION LETTER

6/24/2013 JAIL SUMMARY MtEr

6/24/2013 ALIAS WARRANT

6124/2013

W.

T NUMBER: 13201339337

6/2412013 ALIAS WARRANTS STATUS SET1D OUTSTA DING ON 6fl412ô13 ecourt.montga.ga'BenthmarKVeWGoucase.aspi/UetailsPrint/157593

NEXT EVENT fALERTS - -
112

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 29 of 31

28/13

2009TRT095474- CITY OF MONTGOMERY vs. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D

212

W28/13

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 30 of 31
2009TRT095475- CITY OF MONTGOMERY. CLEVELAND, HARRIET D BackI

Case Details - Summary

2009TRT095475 CITY OF MONTGOMERY vs CLEVELAND, HARRIET 0

I

Judge: MUNICIPALJUDGE

Case Type: Traffic

Case Number: 2009TRTD95475

Uniform Case Number:

Clerk File Date: 10/2212009

Status Date: 10/22/2009

SAD Case Number: AL0030I0O

Total Fees Due: 179.00

Agency MONTGOMERY POLICE DEPARThEI4T Agency Report# N2849161

Status: COMMUTED Custody Location

PARTI ES

TYPE

PARTY NAME

!ATTORNEY

DEFENDANT CLEVELAND, HARRIET

OFFICER DAVIS CAMARAM

PLAIN11FF CITY OF MONTGOMERY

-

CHARGES COUNT DESCRJP11ON I FAIL POSSESS/DISPLAY INS (1STOFFEHSE) (32-7A-1 6(1))

LEVEL DEGREE PLEA D4sPosmoN DISPOSITION DATE

EVENTS

DATE

IEVENT

8/21/2013 8:00 AM

JAIL

3/23/2010 8:00 AM - JAIL

11/3012009 8:00 AM DAILY

]JUDGE WESTRY, MILTON J MUNICIPAL JUDGE MUNICIPAL JUDGE

fOCATION MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM MAIN COURTROOM

JRESULT

-

CONT

CASE HISTORY CASE NUMBER

CHARGE DESCRIPTION

iCASE STATUS IMPOSITION jOUTSTANDING AMOUNT No Additional Cases

CASE DOCK JDATE
8/21/2013

jENTRY TRANSCRIPT

8/21)/2013 JAIL COURTSIT FOROS/21/2013AT8:OOAMINMAJNCOURTROOM

6124/2013 ALIAS WARRANTS STATUS SETTO RECALLED ON 06/24/2013

6124/2013 COLLECTION LETTER

6/24/2013 JAILSUMMARYSHEET

6/24/2013 ALIAS WARRANT

6124/2013 WARRANTNIJMBER 13201339338

6/24/2013

ALIAS WARRANTS STATUS SETTO OUTSTANDING ON 06/24/2013 rti9

NEXT EVENT1RTS 112

8/28/13

Case 2:13-cv-00732-MHT-TFM Document 1-2 Filed 10/04/13 Page 31 of 31
2009TRT095475 - CrrY OF MONTGOMERY vs. CLEVELAND, t-IARR lET 0

212

