Case 5.06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page Iof 20

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF ARKANSAS
PINE BLUFF DIVISION

TERRICK TERRELL NOONER,

Plaintiff

v.

Civil Action No. 5:06-cv-00110-SWW

LARRY NORRIS, et al.,

Defendants

RESPONSE IN OPPOSITION TO MOTION TO DISMISS

On May 1, 2006, Plaintiff, Terrick Terrell Nooner, initiated the instant action pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, challenging the constitutionality of the lethal injection protocol selected and used by Defendants for executions in the State of Arkansas. On May 19, 2006, Defendants filed their Motion to Dismiss, [Document 131, and Brief in Support thereof, [Document 141, wherein they urge this Court to dismiss the action under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(h). None of the four grounds upon which Defendants urge dismissal has merit, and the Motion should accordingly he denied.
A motion to dismiss under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b) should he denied "unless it appears beyond a doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set of facts which would entitle him to relief." Schmedding v. Tnemec Co., 187 F.3d 862, 864 (8th Cir. 1999). See also Mattes v. ABC Plastics Inc., 323 F.3d 695 (8th Cir. 2003). A complaint is to be construed liberally and in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, thereby rendering dismissal appropriate only "in the unusual case in which a plaintiff includes allegations that show

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 2 of 20
on the face of the complaint that there is some insuperable bar to relief." Schmeddirzg, 187 F.3d at 864, (citing Branzlet v. Wilson, 495 F.2d 714, 716 (8th Cir. 1974)). Accordingly, a party seeking to dismiss a complaint under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b) bcars a heavy burden, one that the Dcfcndants here have failed to meet.
I. DEFENDANTS HAVE FAILED TO MEET THEIR BURDEN OF PLEADING AND PROVING THE AFFlRMATIVE DEFENSE OF FAILURE TO EXHAUST ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES A. Defendants Have Failed To Plead, Much Less Prove, Facts Sufficient To Establish A Failure To Exhaust
In their Motion and Brief in Support, Dcfendants first assert that Mr. Nooncr's Complaint should be dismissed based on an alleged failurc Lo comply with the
requirement of the Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1995 ("PLRA"), 42 U.S.C. 5
1997e(a), that a prisoner cxhaust available administrative remedies bcfore filing suit in federal court. (Motion at 2; Brief at 1-3.) Defendants urge the Court to grant the Motion on this ground because Mr. Nooner "is required to provide proof [sic] that he exhausted
all administrative remedies before he can bring a 5 1983 action," and has not done so
(Motion at 2.) To the contrary, failure to exhaust available administrative remedies under the
PLRA is an affirmative defense under Fed.R.Civ.P. 8(c), and Defendanls have the burden of pleading and proving it. Foulk v. Charrier, 262 F.3d 687, 697 (8th Cir. 2001)(citing Massey v. Helman, 196 F.3d 727, 735 (7th Cir. 1999)).' See also Nerness v. Johnson, 401
' Since thc Eighth Circuit followed the Seventh Circuit in its dccision in Foulk in
200 1, its position has been adoptcd by a majority of the circuit courts of appeal who havc

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 3 of 20
F.3d 874, 876 (8th Cir. 2005)(same). Bare and conclusory allcgations of lack of exhaustion are insufficient to mcet this burdcn. Wheeler v. Prince, 3 18 F.Supp.2d 767, 771 (E.D.Ark. 2004).
Defendants' submissions contain nothing but the broad, conclusory allegation that Mr. Nooner has failed to commence or completc proccedings under the Arkansas Department of Correction's grievance procedure. (Brief at 2.) It is important to note that the PLRA requires exhaustion of only thosc administrative remedies that are "available" to the plaintiff. See Porter v. Nussle, 534 U.S. 516, 524 (2002)("No such action shall be brought. . . until such administrative remedies as are available are cxhaustcd")(quoting 42 U.S.C. § 1997e(a)((emphasis added)). Defendants fail to plead any facts whatsoever to establish that there was an administrative remedy available to Mr. Nooner, either under the prison grievance procedure or otherwise, or to show the steps that Mr. Nooner was required, and supposedly failed, to take. See, e.g., Freenzaiz v. Snyder, 2001 W L 515258 (D.Del.)(denying motion for summary judgment on grounds of alleged non-exhaustion where defcndants failed to show that there was an actual administrative remedy available for plaintiff to exhaust).
This glaring omission is undoubtedly attributable to the fact that there indeed was
addressed the question. See Anderson v. XYZ Correctional Health Services Inc., 407
F.3d 674, 677 (4th Cir. 2005); Wyatt v. Terhune, 3 15 F.3d 1108, 1119 (9th Cir. 2003); Casanova v. DuBois, 289 F.3d 142, 147 (1st Cir. 2002); Ray v. Kertes, 285 F.3d 287, 295 (3d Cir. 2002). Only the Tenth and Sixth Circuits have held that the plaintiff is responsible for pleading exhaustion. See Steele v. Fed. Bureau of Prisons, 355 F.3d 1204, 1209 (10th Cir. 2003); Brown v. Toombs, 139 F.3d 1102, 1104 (6th Cir. 1998)(per curiam).

Case 506-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 4 of 20
no administrative procedure available to Mr. Nooner to seek redress of the claims that form the basis for the instant action. See Section I. B, infra. Regardless of the reason for thc inadequacy of the pleading, however, the deficiency precludes this Court from granting the Motion to Dismiss on the ground of failure to exhaust administrative remedies under the PLRA.
B. There Was No Administrative Remedy Available to Mr. Nooner Because The ADC Inmate Grievance Procedure Lacks Authority To Provide Any Relief Or Take Any Action On His Claims a. Only the Director of the ADC Has the Authority to Change the Lethal Injection Protocol and H e I-Ias No Role in the ADC's Administrative Grievance Process
There was in fact no administrative remedy available for Mr. Nooner's claims because the only individual who has the authority to alter the lethal injection protocol, the Director of the Department o f Corrections, takes no part in the A D C Inmate Grievance Procedure. As noted above, the PLRA requires exhaustion of such administrative
remedies as are available to the prisoner. 42 U.S.C. 5 1997e(a) (1994 ed., Supp. V). The
United States Supreme Court addressed the meaning of the phrase "as are available" under the PLRA in Booth v. Churner, 532 U.S. 731, 736 (2001). Mr. Booth, a Pennsylvania prison inmate, filed a claim for relief under 42 U.S.C. $ 1983 seeking monetary damages for an incident involving excessive force by corrections officers. Id. at 734. The Pennsylvania prison's grievance procedure provided for review of claims of excessive force, but it had no policy for recovery of money damages. Id. Mr. Booth argued that, because the grievance procedure was incapable of providing the monetary

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 5 of 20
damages he sought, there was no administrative remedy available to exhaust. Id. at 735
Before interpreting the meaning of availability in this context, the Court carefully
framed the issue before it:
The meaning of the phrase "administrative remedies . . . available"
is the crux of the case, and up to a point the parties approach it with agreement. Neither of them denies that some redress for a wrong is presupposed by the statute's requirement of an "available" "remedy"; neither argues that exhaustion is required where the relevant administrative procedure lacks authority to provide any relief or to take any action whatsoever in response to a complaint. The dispute here, then, comes down to whether or not a remedial scheme is "available" where, as in Pennsylvania, the administrative process has authority to take some action in response to a complaint, but not the remedies action an inmate demands to the exclusion of all other forms of redress.
Id. at 736. The Court recognized that a grievance system that affords the inmate no
possibility of relief leaves the administrative officers with "no authority to act on the
subject of the complaint, leaving the inmate with nothing to exhaust." Id. at n.4. See also
Abney v. McGinnis, 380 F.3d 663, 667 (2d Cir. 2004)("To be 'available' under the PLRA,
a remedy must afford 'the possibility of some relief for the action complained of"')(citing
Booth, 532 U . S . at 738). Because the Pennsylvania prison's administrative process had
authority to take at least some action in response to Mr. Booth's complaint, the Court held
that a grievance procedure was, in fact, "available" to Mr. Booth for purposes of the
PLRA's exhaustion requirement. Id. at 739
Quite the opposite is true for Mr. Nooner. The essence of Mr. Nooner's claims is
that the particular method of execution by lethal injection that Defendants have adopted
and propose to employ subjects him to a substantial risk of suffering excruciating pain

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 6 of 20
and torture during his execution that is gratuitous and unnccessary in violation of the Constitution. Under Arkansas law, the only person who has thc authority to act on a complaint about the protocol and to order that changcs be made to it is Defcndant Larry
Norris, Director of the Arkansas Department of Correction. See Ark. Code Ann. 5 5-4-
617(a)(2)("The Director of the Department of Correction shall determine the substances to be uniformly administered and the procedures to be used in any execution"). The statute is unequivocal, and does not even permit the Director to delegate this function to a subordinate under his supervision.
However, the Director has no role in the ADC Inmate Grievance Procedure, which is administered entirely by other ADC staff who have no such authority. The procedure, which is set forth in ADC Administrative Directive 04-01, has three steps: informal resolution, grievance to wardcn and finally appeal to the deputylassistant director of ADC. According to the Administrative Directive, "[tlhe DeputyIAssistant Director will respond in writing to the inmate concerning the decision within 30 working days. This is
the final level for the appeal process." Id. at 9 IV.G.5. (emphasis added). The
Directive goes on to state explicitly: "The Director of the Department of Correction is not routinely involved in the Inmate Grievance Procedure. No appeals should be sent to the Director." Id. (emphasis added).
The Administrative Directive notes that the Director may choose to intervene in the grievance process at his discretion, id., but there is no procedure for seeking redress from the Director for any complaints of any nature. Because there is no individual

C a s e 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 7 of 20
involved in any stage of the grievance process who has the lawful authority to respond to or provide any relief for his challenge to the ADC's lethal injection protocol, Mr. Nooner had no administrative remedy to exhaust. Booth, 532 U.S. at 736 n.4. See also Brown v. Crawfovd, 408 F.3d 1072, 1030-31 (8th Cir. 2005)(Byc, J., dissenting from denial of motion for stay of execution)(noting that plaintiff had no administrative remedy available to exhaust because director of department of corrections, the only person empowered to change lethal injection protocol, played only limited appellate role in prison grievance process).
h. Mr. Nooncr's execution under the lethal injection protocol chosen by the Director is an anticipated event and therefore is non-grievable by the ADC's Administrative Grievance Process
If a plaintiff's complaint is deemcd "non-grievablc" and excluded from thc administrative grievance process on that basis, the plaintiff has no administrative remedy for the complaint and therefore nothing to exhaust under the PLRA. See, e.g., Fveenzan 1). Snyder, 2001 WL 5 15258 (D.Del.)(finding no administrative remedy available to plaintiff because his claims were non-grievable under the prison system); Mulliizs V . Snzitlz, 14 F.Supp.2d 1009, 1012 (E.D.Mich. 1998)(same); Torrence v. Pesaizti, 239 F.Supp.2d 230, 234 n.4 (D.Conn. 2003)(ordering further briefing and evidence on question of whether plaintiff's claim is a non-grievable issue under applicable Administrative Directive and thus had no remedies which may be exhausted); Mavtilz v. Crall, 2006 W L 515530 at *9 (W.D.Ky.)(noting that if issucs are designated non-grievablc, no grievance mechanism is available and there is no exhaustion barrier to filing suit). Mr. Nooner's objection to the

C a s e 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 0610212006 Page 8 of 20
Defendant's lethal injection protocol is just such a claim. The ADC Inmate Grievance Procedure provides inmates in its custody with a
procedure for the resolution of "complaints, needs, and other problems." Ark. Dep't of Corr. Admin. Directive 04-01 § I. (Feb. 1, 2004). The procedure is available to address a variety of prisoner complaints, but expressly excludes those issues designated as "nongrievable matters" from administrative review. Id. at § 1II.E. One o f the categories of claims that are considered non-grievable is "[alnticipatcd events (i.e. scheduled events or
activities which may occur in the future)." Id. at 3 III.E.6.
Mr. Nooner's claim, that his execution in accordance with the unconstitutional lethal injection protocol selected by the Director will likely subject him to gratuitous pain and suffering, is a quintessential example of an "anticipated event." Mr. Nooner has not suffered any harm yet; rather, he seeks to prevent that harm before it occurs because he will obviously have no remedy or redress once his execution is underway. Thus there can bc little qucstion that Mr. Nooner's claim falls squarely into the category of anticipated events, thereby rcndering his complaint a non-gricvablc matter under Ark Dep't of Corr. Admin. Directive 04-01 § III.E.6. The Department of Correction's grievance procedure is therefore unavailable to him for this reason, also, and so there is no requirement under the PLRA that he attempt to exhaust the procedure.
C . There Was No Administrative Remedy Available to Mr. Nooner Because He Is Prevented From Appropriate Use of the Grievance Process By His Debilitating Mental Illness
Even if the Inmate Grievance Procedure was generally available to A D C inmates

Case 5.06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 0610212006 Page 9 of 20
to seck redress of claims regarding the lethal injection protocol, the Procedure is not available to Mr. Nooner becausc he is prevented from effcctivcly utilizing thc process by his severe mcntal illness and incompctence. One of the prominent symptoms of Mr. Nooner's mental illness is a fixed delusional system that prevents him from rccognizing the rcality of his own impending execution, much less comprehending that filing a prison grievance could be nccessary to avoid a tortuous and agonizing death. Mr. Nooner's incompetence would thus excuse him from exhausting any otherwise availablc
administrative mechanism .
The PLRA's phrase "such administrative rcmedies as are available" mcans those administrative remedies that are "immediately utilizable" by and "accessible" to the inmate. Days v. Johnson, 322 F.3d 863, 867 (5th Cir. 2003); accord Miller v. Novris, 247 F3d 736, 740 (8th Cir. 2001)(applying the same dictionary definition of the term "available" to interpret the PLRA's language "as are availahle")(citations omitted). In
Days, a Texas prison inmate filed suit against prison officials under 42 U.S.C. 5 1983
prior to submitting a written complaint to the prison's gricvance officer. Days, 322 F.3d at 866. The court found that a wrist injury prevented Mr. Days from filing a timely gricvance request, and gricvance officers wcre inattcntivc to his oral requcsts for rclicf, thereby rendering any gricvance procedure inaccessiblc to him. Id. at 866-867. The Fifth Circuit recognized that "one's personal inability to acccss the grievance system could render thc system unavailable" for purposes of thc PLRA's exhaustion requircment. Id. at 867 (citing Ferrington v. Louisiaiza Dep 't of Correctioizs, 315 F.3d 529 (5th Cir. 2002)).

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 2 0 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 1 0 of 20
Given his illjury and his subsequent attempts to access the grievance process, the court held that Mr. Days had exhausted the administrative remedies that were available to him. Id. at 868. See also Pavey v. Conley, No. 05-2004, slip op. at 15-17 (7th Cir. Fcb. 1, 2006)(where inmate's broken arm prevented him from completing grievance form and grievance officers were unwilling to provide assistance in the matter, administrative remedies were unavailable to the inmate and exhaustion was excused).
Here, Mr. Nooner suffers from an disability much more severe than a broken wrist. Mr. Nooner suffers from schizophrenia. Dr. Xavier Amador, Ph.D, an adjunct professor of Clinical Psychology at Columbia University with extensive experience with individuals with schizophrenia, has concluded that Mr. Nooner meets the criteria for a diagnosis of Schizophrenia, Disorganized Type. Mr. Nooner's most prominent symptoms are disordered thought and speech, and bizarre, fixed delusions. In 2002, at a hearing on Mr. Nooner's competency to waive his rights to federal habeas corpus review, Dr. Richart DeMeir, clinical psychologist at the Federal Bureau of Prisons Medical Center in Springfield, testificd that Mr. Nooner was mentally ill to the point of incompetency.2 According to Dr. DeMeir, Mr. Nooncr's disorder is characterized by severe thought disorder and fixed, long-standing delusions. H e manifested scvere disorganization of speech, which was rambling and illogical. His thoughts were irrational, rarely tied together in a way that could be understood. He was unable to provide any logical or
2Dr.DeMeir felt that he had insufficient information to enable him to diagnose the specific disorder with which Mr. Nooner suffers and therefore entered a provisional Axis I diagnosis of Psychosis NOS.

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 0610212006 Page 11 of 20
rational explanation for his desire to waive his appeals, insisting that he does not want to die but wants to have his execution scheduled because he believes that this will lead to his exoneration by the clemency board. He exhibited numerous delusions that were so convoluted that Dr. DeMeir was unable to cxplain them. Dr. DeMeir explained that it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to feign such disordered speech; he did not know of anyone, even psychologists, who could successfully do so.
Mr. Nooner's delusions prevent him from understanding that his execution is imminent. They prevent him from realizing that he will die according to the Arkansas Department of Correction's lethal injection protocol, which creates a substantial and unnecessary risk that he will be fully conscious and in agonizing pain for the duration of the execution process. Sadly, the delusions prevent him from knowing that the Constitution provides a remedy for such cruel and unusual punishment. Accordingly, Mr. Nooner is unable to utilize the prison's grievance procedure to seek redress of his claims, and no administrative remedy is availablc to him. C ' Miller, 247 F.3d at 740. (where the allegations contained in prisoner's complaint averred that prison officials prevented him from utilizing the grievance process, administrative remedies were unavailable for purposes of the PLRA). Therefore, the PLRA's exhaustion requirement is inapplicable to Mr. Nooner.
D. Mr. Nooner Has Substantially Complied With The PLRA's Exhaustion Requirement
In light of the inability of anyone other than the Director of the ADC to provide redress for Mr. Nooner's claim, and Mr. Nooner's own inability to pursue the established

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 12 of 20
Inmate Grievance Process, undersigned counsel undertook to inform the Director o f Mr. Nooner's claim and provide him with an opportunity to respond by contacting the Director on Mr. Nooner's behalf. These efforts have resulted in substantial compliance with the PLRA's administrative exhaustion requirement sufficient to satisfy the statutory provision. See Nyhuis v. Reno, 204 F.3d 65, 77-78 (3rd Cir. 2000)("we note our understanding that compliance with the administrative remedy scheme will be satisfactory i f it is substantial")(eiting Miller v. Tanner, 196 F.3d 1190, 1194 ( I 1 th Cis. 1999)); Freeman v. Snyder, 2001 W L 515258 at *8 (D.Del.)(findingthat plaintiff substantially complied with PLIIA's exhaustion requirement where he made repeated oral requests to be moved to a different cell prior to assault, receivcd conflicting information about the proper procedure, and was unable to timely file a grievance after the assault due to injury).
On April 21, 2006, undersigned counsel wrote to the Defendant Larry Norris, Director o f the Arkansas Department o f Correction, informing him o f Mr. Nooner's incompetence and his inability to use the inmate grievance procedure as a means o f protecting his legal interests. Counsel's letter advised the Director o f Ms. Nooner's claim that the current procedure for executions by lethal injection creates a substantial risk that Mr. Nooner will not be properly anesthetized for the duration o f his impending execution, thereby subjecting him to an arbitrary, capricious, and irrational method o f execution in violation o f the United States Constitution. A t the conclusion o f the letter, counsel requested that the Director modify the execution process to comply with accepted

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 13 of 20
standards of medical care and relevant provisions of the Arkansas state statute. Counsel also provided a phone numbcr and address and invitcd Mr. Norris to call with any questions or requests for further information. Mr. Norris accepted delivery of the letter from the Federal Express carrier on April 24, 2006.
In keeping with the Department of Correction's Administrative Directive, counsel should have received a response within three working days of receipt of the letter. Ark. Dep't of Corr. Admin. Directive 04-01 § IV.E.S.(declaring that inmates will receive a response to informal grievance rcquests within 3 working days or within 24 hours if the request qualifies as an emergency). However, after five working days had passed from Mr. Norris's receipt of the letter, undersigned counsel had still received no response. Counsel thcreafter filed the instant action on May I, 2006.
In this manner, undersigned counscl atteinpted to resolve the issues presented in this Con~plainwt ith the Dcfcndant Dircctor of thc Dcpartment o f Correction prior to
filing suit under 42. U.S.C. 5 1983. Undersigned counsel's effort satisficd thc concerns
that lead to thc enactment of the PLRA, for the Director, the only person with authority to act on the complaint, was "afforded ... time and opportunity to addrcss [thc] complaint[]
internally before ... the initiation of a federal case." Poiater 1). Nussle, 534 U.S. 516, 525
(2002). Additionally, on May 26,2006, following commencement of the instant action,
undersigned counscl finally received a response to her letter to Defendant Norris, in the form of a letter from Assistant Attorney General Joseph V. Svohoda, indicating that

Case 506-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 14 of 20
Defendant Director Norris received counsel's letter and asked the Attorney General to respond. The letter reads in relevant part:
While Mr. Norris is aware that several states' protocol has been, and some currently are, the subject of litigation, he believes the protocol used currently insures the necessary anesthetization for the duration of the execution procedure and satisfies Constitutional requirements. (Letter from Joseph Svoboda to Julie Brain, Dated May 25, 2006.) The quotcd passage indicates that Defendant Director Norris has considered the merits of Mr. Nooner's claim and rcsolvcd thc issue adversely to Mr. Nooner. The only conccivablc avcnue for redrcss of the claim has thcreforc been exhausted 11. BECAUSE MR. NOONER'S EXECUTION HAS ONLY RECENTLY
BECOME IMMINENT, NEITHER THE STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS NOR THE DOCTRINE OF LACHES BARS THIS ACTION Contrary to Defendants' assertions, (Brief at 3-4), Mr. Nooner's claim is not subject to a statute of limitation because his Complaint seeks only declarative and injunctive relief. It is well settled that where, as here, a plaintiff seeks only equitable remedies, the plaintiff's claim is subject only to the doctrine of laches and not to a statute of limitations. Goodman v. McDoimell Douglas, 606 F.2d 800, 805 (8th Cir. 1979)(citing Holmbevg v. Avnzbrechf, 327 U.S. 392, 396 (1946)). 1x1 order for the doctrine of laches to bar a plaintiff from seeking equitable relief, "the plaintiff must be guilty of unreasonable and inexcusable dclay that has resultcd in prejudice to thc defendant." Id. The cxistcncc and Icngth of any analogous statutes of limitation is but one elcment of the factors to be considered in determining whether any delay that may have occurred should be deemed

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 15 of 20
unreasonable. Id. In any event, it is clear under either a laches o r a statute of limitations analysis that Mr. Nooner diligently and timely prosecuted the instant action as soon as it became ripe for review.
In his Complaint, Mr. Nooner does not attack the constitutionality of execution by lethal injection in general, but rather objects to the specific procedure that thc Defendant Director of the Department of Correction currently uses to carry out executions by lethal injection. Mr. Nooner could not know with any degree of confidence exactly which procedure he would be subject to until his execution became imminent, at which time the likelihood that the Defendants would suddenly changc their procedure and render his challenge moot became d e minimis. Under a statutory scheme such as that in place in Arkansas, which places the entire authority for determining the details of the lethal iujection protocol in the Director of the Department of Correction as an administrative matter, the precise drugs, dosages, combinations and procedures are subject to change at
thc whim of the Director at any time. See Ark. Code Ann. 5 5-4-617(a)(2)("The Director
of the Department of Correction shall determine the substances to b e uniformly administered and the procedures to be used in any execution").
Not only is the protocol subject to change administratively, judicial action may potentially lead to dramatic changes in the procedures to which a condemned person is subject. See, e.g.,Morales v. Hiclcmarz, 415 F.Supp.2d 1037, 1047 (N.D. Cal. 2006) (conditionally denying preliminary injunction if State will agree to change lethal injection protocol to one that uses barbiturates only or one that includes monitoring by person

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 16 of 20
trained in general anesthesia); Bvown v. Beck, 445 F.3d 752, 753-54 (4th Cir. 2006)(Michael, J., dissenting)(describing district court's approval of change in North Carolina's lcthal injection protocol to include usc of bispcctral indcx monitor to monitor consciousness)
Indeed, Arkansas's statute provides for automatic substitution of electrocution as the manner of execution in the event that lethal injection is deemed unconstitutional per
sc, see Ark. Code Ann. S 5-4-617(b), and so not only the specific procedures but even the
overall means of causing death is potentially subject to change. See also Fierro v. Gomez, 77 F.3d 301, 309 (9th Cir. 1996)(holding that California's practice of conducting executions by lethal gas violates Constitution; method of execution thereafter changed to lethal injection, see Cal. Penal Code Ann. §3604(b)(West Supp. 1996)).
Under such circumstances, a challenge to a particular execution protocol cannot be deemed ripe for adjudication until the plaintiff's execution is imminent. Cooey v. Tufi, 2006 WL 1207982 (S.D.Ohio)('"[T]he statute of limitations on claims raising specific challenges to a method of execution, but otherwise conceding that the execution can be carried out in a constitutional manner if the specific challenges arc addressed, begins to run when the execution bccomcs imminent and the plaintiff knows or has reason to know
of the facts giving rise to his specific challenges.' ... This Court has rcasoncd that those
two conditions are met when the plaintiff has exhausted all of his state and fedcral avcnues of relief, i.e., when thc United Statcs Supreme Court denies certiorari in the plaintiff's habeas corpus proceedingsM)(quotingprevious order o f court)

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 17 of 20
Such a rule is consistent with established fcdcral law governing accrual of claims for relief. See, e.g., Slaaten v. Uttited States, 990 F.2d 1038 (8th Cir. 1993)("A claim 'accrues' when the plaintiff knows or reasonably should know both the existencc and cause of the injuryV)(citingUnited States v. Kubviclc, 444 U.S. 11 I , 121-23 (1979)). Indeed, a contrary rule would potentially lead to multiplc challenges to multiple methods and procedures over many years, none of which the plaintiff would ultimately be subjected to, in order to cnsure that the true claim is timely. Such unncccssary and pointless consumption of judicial rcsourccs is contrary to ends of justicc.
The imminence of Mr. Nooner's execution was realized April 26, 2006, whcn Mr. Nooner's pctition for writ of certiorari was scheduled for conference by thc United States Suprcme Court for May 11, 2006. Counsel for Mr. Nooner reasonably predicted that the writ of certiorari would be denied May 15,2006, and as a rcsult, counscl immediately began final preparation of the Complaint in the instant case. On May 1,2006, counsel filed the instant suit to prevent Mr. Nooner from being subject to the unconstitutional execution procedures currently in place at the Arkansas Department of Corrcction. Thc action was thus initiated even before certiorari was actually denied, which occurred as anticipated on May 15, 2006. Far from an 11th hour attempt to manipulate and abuse the system, thcn, the instant action is a good-faith effort to movc as promptly and expeditiously as possible to protect Mr. Nooner's constitutional rights
111. MR. NOONER'S CLAIM IS PROPERLY BROUGHT UNDER
42 U.S.C. 5 1983 AND IS NOT THE EQUIVALENT OF A
PETITION FOR WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 18 of 20
Mr. Nooner's Complaint does not challenge the legality of his conviction or
sentcncc, nor does it seek to prcvcnt thc statc from executing him in a lawful manncr
Mr. Nooncr's challenge to the mcthod of execution to which the Defendants' intcnd to
subject him is thus indistinguishable from the challenge that the Supreme Court deemed
to be proper under 42 U.S.C. 5 1983 in Nelson v. Campbell, 541 U.S. 637 (2004). In
Nelson, the Court distinguished between a challenge to the fact of a conviction or the
duration of a sentence, which properly sounds in habeas corpus, and a claim relating
solely to conditions of confinement, which is an appropriate basis for a $ 1983 action.
Id. at 643. Mr. Nelson's claim fell into the latter catcgory, thc Court found, bccause it
challenged the particular execution proccdurc chosen by the defendants, namely a "cut-
down." Id. at 644.) That particular method was unnecessary, for it was not mandated by the applicable state statute and, as Mr. Nelson conceded, other, constitutional mcthods
were available. Id. at 645. Because the Defendants could go forward with the execution
notwithstanding the plaintiff's claim simply by altering their method of causing death, the
suit did not necessarily imply the invalidity of the plaintiff's sentence and was thercfore
The Supreme Court was thus not required to decide the broader question of whether a challenge to a particular categoty of execution methods, such as lethal injection per se or
electrocution, similarly was available under 5 1983 and not required lo be brought in habeas. Id.
at 644. That question need not detain this Court either, given that Mr. Nooner's claim also challenges only the particular procedure chosen and does not allege that lethal injection per se is unconstitutional. However, if the Court were inclined to rule adversely to Mr. Nooner on this point it would be appropriate to first await the issuance of the Supreme Court's opinion in Hill v. Crosby, 126 S.Ct. 1189 (2006), due to be dccided prior to the conclusion of the Term on June 30, 2006, in which the Supreme Court is expectcd to decide the larger issue. See Taylov, 2006 W L
1098173 at * 3 (permitting challenge to lethal injection protocol to continue as 5 1983 action
unlcss forthcoming decision in Hill mandates different decision).

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 06/02/2006 Page 19 of 20
proper undcr $ 1983. Id. at 644-647. Likewise, Mr. Nooner's claim that the particular combination of drugs, dosages
and conditions of administration prescribed or overlooked by the protocol chosen by
Defendants and set forth in Administrative Directive 96-06 is properly brought undcr 5
1983. The Arkansas state statute requires only that death be caused by "a continuous intravenous injection of a lethal quantity of an ultra-short-acting barbiturate in
combination with a chemical paralytic agent." Ark. Code Ann. 5 5-4-617(a)(l). All
decisions regarding the particular drugs that will bc chosen, the dosages in which they will be administered and the procedures and conditions under which they will be introduced into the prisoner's vein are expressly the responsibility of Defendant Norris. Ark. Code Ann. $ 5-4-617(a)(2)("The Director of the Department of Correction shall determine the substances to be uniformly administered and the procedures to be used in any execution").
Plaintiff has expressly alleged that alternative methods of causing death by lethal injection, which do not engender foresecable, utterly unnecessary risks of gratuitous pain and suffering, arc available. Accordingly, Defendants remain able to proceed with the execution by alternative, humane means. The instant action seeks only to prohibit the execution of Mr. Nooner in accordance with the current protocol, under which he is subject to exactly those unconstitutional risks. The action is thus propcrly brought under
5 1983.

C a s e 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 20 Filed 0610212006 Page 20 of 20
WHEREFORE, for the foregoing reasons, Plaintiff Terrick Terrell Noonel respectfully requests that this Court deny Defendants' Motion to Dismiss.
Respectfully submitted, JENNIFFER IlORAN FEDERAL DEFENDER
By: Is/ Julie Brain Julie Brain Assistant Federal Public Defender 1401 W. Capitol, Suite 490 Little Rock, Arkansas 72201 (501) 324-61 13 (501) 324-5630 fax
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE The undersigned hereby certifies that on this 2nd day of June, 2006, the foregoing Response in Opposition to Motion was filed using this Court's EFICMS electronic filing system and thereby automatically delivered electronically to Assistant Attorney General Mark Hagemeier, Catlett-Prien Tower Bldg., 323 Center Street, Suite 200, Little Rock, AR 72201-2610.
IS/ Julie Brain Julie Brain

