UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF ARKNSAS
PINE BLUFF DNISION
TERRCK TERRLL NOONER
O. Box 600 Grady, AR 71644

FILED
s. DISTRICT COURT EASTERN DISTRICT ARKANSAS
M;W 0 1 2006
MES W. McCORMACK, CLERK
DEP CLERK

LARY NORRS , in his official capacity as
DIRECTOR
ARNSAS DEPARTMENT
OF CORRCTION
O. Box 8707 Pine Bluff, AR 71611

Civil Action No.

5.. () I; C'J () 116 II 11

t. Ule( ThiS case assigne to Di
and to Magistrate Judge

GA YLON LAY, in his official capacity as
WAREN
ARNSAS DEPARTMENT OF
CORRCTION
CUMMINS UNIT O. Box 500
Grady, AR 71644

WENDY KELLY, in her official capacity as
DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR HEALTH AND CORRCTIONAL PROGRAS
ARNSAS DEPARTMENT
OF CORRCTION
O. Box 8707
Pine Bluff, AR 71611

JOHN BYUS, in his offcial capacity as ADMINISTRATOR
CORRECTIONAL MEDICAL SERVICES
ARNSAS DEPARTMENT
OF CORRECTION
O. Box 8707 Pine Bluff, AR 71611

, DOES 1- , UNKNOWN EXECUTIONERS
in their offcial capacities as Employees
and/or Agents of the Arkansas Deparent
of Correction.

COMPLAINT

I. Nature

of the Action

This is a civil rights action brought under 42 U. C. 1983 and the United States

Constitution for violations and threatened violations of the rights of the Plaintiff to be

free from cruel and unusual punishment under the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution, to be free from arbitrar and capricious Departent of

Correction procedures and protocols in violation ofthe Fift and Fourteenth Amendments

of the United States Constitution, and to be free from deliberate indifference ofthe

Defendants toward Plaintiffs ' health and safety in violation of the Eighth and Fourteenth

Amendments of the United States Constitution.

Plaintiff, Terrck Terrell Nooner, is an Arkansas prison inmate who is under a sentence

of death. By statute, Arkansas employs lethal injection as its method of execution. The Defendants and the Arkansas Deparment of Correction (hereinafter "ADC") have
designed a procedure for carng out Arkansas' statutory method of execution that

purorts to induce death only after a condemned prisoner has been rendered unconscious and unable to experience pain. In reality, however, the policies and practices devised by

the Defendants and the ADC unecessarly risk conscious suffering and extreme pain

durng execution and deliberately ignore and are indifferent to the health and safety of

condemed prisoners, in violation of Plaintiffs civil rights guaranteed by 42 U. C.

1983 and the rights conferred by the Fift, Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the

United States Constitution. Plaintiff seeks equitable and injunctive relief. Ths lawsuit does not challenge the fact of the

Plaintiffs sentence of death, nor does it challenge the constitutionality of Arkansas ' statute

requiring execution by lethal injection. II. Jurisdiction and Venue
This Court has subject matter jurisdiction over this action pursuant to 28 U.S.C. ~ ~ 1331 (federal question); 1343 (civil rights violations); 2201 (declaratory relief); and 2202
(furter relief).
Venue is proper under 28 U.S. C. ~ ~ 1391(b)(1) and 1391 (b)(2) because all Defendants reside withn this distrct and a substantial portion of the events giving rise to this claim have occured and wil occur within this distrct as par of the offcial business of the Departent of Correction.
III. The Parties Plaintiff Terrck Terrell Nooner is a United States Citizen and resident of the State of Arkansas. He is curently a prisoner under the supervision of the Arkansas Deparent of
Correction, ADC Number SK 926, awaiting the execution of a death sentence that was
imposed by the Pulaski County Circuit Court in 1993. Mr. Nooner is held in the Varer
Supermax Unit of the Arkansas Deparent of Correction in Grady, Arkansas. Mr.
Nooner does not have a scheduled execution date; when an execution date is scheduled according to ADC policy, Mr. Nooner wil be transferred to the Cummins Unit, also in Grady, Arkansas. The execution wil take place at the Cummins Unit.
Defendant Lar Norrs is the Director of the Arkansas Deparent of Correction.
Pursuant to state statute, Mr. Norrs determines the substances to be uniformly administered and the procedures to be used in any execution of an Arkansas prisoner and he and/or his assistants conduct each execution. Defendant Gaylon Lay is the Warden of the ADC Cumins Unit where the death

chamber is located and Plaintiffs execution wil be cared out. Warden Lay is the head
of the chain of command for control during each execution. Defendant Wendy Kelly is the Deputy Director for Health and Correctional Programs of the Arkansas Departent of Correction. Pursuant to established ADC procedure, the Deputy Director or her designee is responsible for obtaining the chemicals that are used to execute condemned prisoners and for establishing and maintaining intravenous access to the prisoner for the purose of administering the lethal injection. 10. Defendant John Byus is the Administrator of Correctional Medical Services for the Arkansas Deparment of Correction.
11. Defendants Unkown Executioners are the officers, agents, employees, and successors in offce, along with those acting in concert with them, of the Arkansas Deparent of
Correction who wil assist in carng out the executions of Plaintiff. Plaintiff does not
yet know the identities of the Unkown Executioners.
12. Defendants are acting under color of State law in establishing and designng the ADC execution policies and protocol and wil act under color of State law in selecting and administering to Plaintiff chemicals in amounts, in combinations, and by methods that wil unnecessarly risk conscious suffering and pain in the execution of a sentence of death and which are deliberately indifferent to the health, welfare, and safety of Plaintiff. VI. Statement of Facts
13. Lethal injection has been promoted as a peaceful, dignfied and humane way to induce death, akin to euthanzing a pet - a single injection, immediate unconsciousness, no
strggling or movement, with death occurrng withn seconds. The reality in Arkansas
however, is often quite different.

, "

14. Ronald Gene Simmons was executed by the State of Arkansas on June 25, 1990. The

administration ofthe lethal chemicals began at 9:02pm. Between 9:02 and 9:04pm

according to an eyewitness, Mr. Simmons appeared to nod off into unconsciousness.

However at 9:05pm he called out ' Oh! Oh!' and began to cough sporadically as though

he might be having difficulty breathing. During the next two minutes, he coughed

slightly, approximately 20 times, each cough heaving his stomach slightly and causing the gurney to shake a little."l Mr. Simmons became stil at 9:07pm, after which his face and arm turned first blue and then purple. An ADC employee twice appeared to adjust the
tube in Mr. Simmons' ar , and not until 9:19pm was Mr. Simmons pronounced dead by

the coroner.

15. Rickey Ray Rector was put to death in Arkansas on January 24, 1992. The execution
ars took one hour and 9 minutes to complete, during which time Mr. Rector s hands and

were punctured 10 separate times by ADC personnel searching for a suitable vein in

which to place the

ar. line and finally a deep incision, a "cut-down " was made in his

The curtains between the execution chamber and the witness room remained closed

during the 50 minutes it took to place the

line, but witness heard Mr. Rector s loud

moans as his skin was repeatedly pierced. Witnesses also heard the sound of skin

slapping skin as ADC personnel apparently tred to raise a vein, prompting one witness to

1 Bil Simmons Stoic Murderer Meets His Fate by Quiet Means ARNSAS DEMOCRAT June 26, 1990, at 9A. Bil Simmons was the Arkansas Bureau Chief for the Associated Press and, upon information and belief, no relation to Ronald Gene Simmons.
2 Sonja Clinesmith Moans Pierced Silence During Wait ARNSAS DEMOCRAT
GAZETTE, January 26, 1992, at 1B; Ron Fourner, 13 Outsiders View Death of Rector, Witnesses Listen, Wait Beyond Curtain ARKNSAS DEMOCRAT GAZETTE, Januar 26 , 1992, at 4B.

, "

say ' (tJhey re going to beat him to death. "'3 Even once the

line was secured and the

curtains opened, the ordeal for Mr. Rector was not over. The flow oflethal chemicals

began at 9:50pm, and for two minutes Mr. Rector looked to witnesses as though he was

nodding off to sleep. However, one observer noted that Mr. Rector said "' I'm getting

dizzy,''' two minutes after the execution began. Then at 9:55pm Rector s lips moved

rapidly - as ifhe was drawing shallow breaths. His lips stopped moving a minute later.

Mr. Rector stil was not pronounced dead; at 1 0:06pm a witness noted that a heart

monitor at the head of the guey appeared to be flat-lining, only to then see another
jump" and then "another flutter."6 Death was finally pronounced at 0:09pm.

16. On May 7, 1992, Steven Douglas Hil was executed. His execution began at 9:02pm.

His eyes closed one minute later, but shortly afterwards he had what witnesses described

as "a ' seizure ' arching his back with his cheeks popping OUt.,,7 The seizue ended at

9:04pm and Mr. Hil was pronounced dead at 9:10pm.

17. Chrstina Riggs, the first woman to be put to death in Arkansas in over 150 years, was

executed on May 2, 2000. The procedure was delayed for 18 minutes while ADC

3 Ron Fourer
, 13

Outsiders View Death of Rector, Witnesses Listen, Wait Beyond

Curtain ARNSAS DEMOCRAT GAZETTE, January 26, 1992, at 4B.

4 Joe Farmer Rector, 40, Executed for Offcer s Slaying, ARNSAS DEMOCRAT GAZETTE, January 25 , 1992, at 9A. If a suffcient dose of Thiopental is properly administered to
the prisoner, it wil cause him to lose consciousness and stop breathing within one minute.

S Ron Fourner
, 13

Outsiders View Death of Rector, Witnesses Listen, Wait Beyond

Curtain ARNSAS DEMOCRAT GAZETTE, Januar 26, 1992, at 4B.

6 Id.

7 Andy Gotlieb and Linda Satter,

Hil Dies by Injection for

DEMOCRAT GAZETTE, May 8 , 1992 , at 17 A.

84 Police Kiling,

ARKNSAS

personnel struggled in vain to insert the IV line into her elbows. When they could not do

, they asked Ms. Riggs if they could insert the catheters into her wrists, and she

consented. The execution then proceeded. However, a minute after the drugs had

purortedly begu to flow into her body, Ms. Riggs was stil vocalizing. Witnesses heard
her say "I love you, my babies.

18. More of the 26 individuals who have been executed by lethal injection by the State of

Arkansas may have suffered agonies during the execution procedure, while their suffering

was hidden from observers by the total paralysis induced by the ADC' s decision to use a

neuromuscular blocking agent, namely Pancurium Bromide, as one of the chemicals

administered during the procedure.

See Paragraphs 33- , 42- infra incorporated by

reference as if fully set fort herein.

19. Unless modified, the policies and practices followed by the ADC, which are the same

today as were used in the executions of Mr. Simmons, Mr. Rector, Mr. Hil and Ms.

Riggs, wil unnecessarly place Plaintiff at risk of suffering the same excruciating,

tortous death as was experienced by Mr. Simmons, Mr. Rector, Mr. Hil and Ms. Riggs.

Arkansas ' Lethal Injection Legislation

20. In 1983 , the Arkansas State Legislature enacted a statute prescribing that "(tJhe

punshment of death is to be administered by a continuous, intravenous injection of a

lethal quantity of an ultra-short-acting barbiturate in combination with a chemical

paralytic agent until the defendant's death is pronounced according to accepted standards

of medical practice." Ark. Code An. ~ 5- 617(a)(1). Ths legislation mandated

g Cathy Frye Riggs, Mother who Kiled her

Children, Put to Death by State

ARNSAS DEMOCRAT GAZETTE, May 3 2000, at IB.

, "

execution by this method for all defendants whose capital crimes were committed after

July 4, 1983.

21. The statute prescribes no specific drugs, dosages, drug combinations, maner of

intravenous line access, or certifications, training, or licensure for those who participate in

executions. All of the details for carrng out executions are left up to the Director of the

ADC. Ark. Code An. 9 5- 617(a)(2)("The Director of the Deparment of Correction

shall determine the substances to be uniformly administered and the procedures to be

used in any execution

How Executions Are Performed in Arkansas

22. On information and belief, executions by lethal injection in Arkansas are performed in the

following way:

23. The condemned prisoner is strapped to a guey in the execution chamber. His head is
completely immobilized by two pieces of plastic, which press against the sides of his face
ars like bookends, and a tight leather strap across his forehead. His are spread at angles

away from his body, and each hand is strapped to a board that protrdes from each side of
the guey. A leather breastplate is held in place by a strap across his chest, straps ruing
over each shoulder and a strap across his waist. Another strap rus across his thighs.

Finally, leather shackles are placed around his anles and then fastened to the guey,

immobilizing his lower legs.

24.

ADC employees insert two intravenous

lines into the condemned prisoner and

attach an electrocardiogram monitor. The execution protocol states only that the

Defendant Deputy Director of Health and Correctional Programs, or her designee shall

have catheters placed in each arm or other appropriate areas." This simple statement in

actuality refers to a significant medical procedure that can be fraught with problems

and complications. The typical site for obtaining intravenous access is the area ofthe

antecubital fossae, or elbow folds. However, such access is not always obtainable and

other, increasingly invasive procedures may be the only methods available. Despite this

fact the execution protocol fails to provide any further guidance as to how intravenous

access is to be secured. No procedures govern which

insertion point wil be selected

the circumstances under which an alternate

insertion point wil be selected, which

alternate site wil be selected or the qualifications of the person or persons who wil

perform surgical procedures such as insertion of subclavian lines or cut-downs.

25.

When the

lines are in place, the curtain across the window that divides the execution

chamber from the witness room is lifted. A section of the IV lines is visible, and can be

seen runnng from the condemned prisoner s body, draped across the floor ofthe chamber

and passing through a hole in a glass window that leads to a separate control room where

the two executioners wait. Extended

lines are required in order to stretch into the

control room. Last statements are made, and then the Warden orders the execution to

begi.

26. The two lay-executioners then begi attaching and plunging up to eight hand-held plastic

syrnges in a complicated sequence prescribed by the ADC protocol. First one drug, then

a saline flush, then two syrnges of the next drug, another saline flush, and then up to

three syrnges of a third drug. It is not known who, if anyone, directs the sequence of

drug administration for the executioners or how they divide the varous tasks between

them.

27. The drugs purortedly administered are: Thiopental (to cause unconsciousness); Pancuronium Bromide (to cause paralysis and to stop all movement including respiration); 10 and Potassium Chloride (to stop the hear).
28. The putative drugs dosages are:
2 g Thiopental; 10- 15cc Normal Saline; 50 mg Pancuronium Bromide; 50 mg Pancuronium Bromide; 10- 15cc Normal Saline; 50 meqs (miliequivalents) Potassium Chloride; 50 meqs Potassium Chloride; 50 meqs Potassium Chloride.
29. When the prisoner no longer exhibits any signs of life, the Warden summons the coroner into the death chamber to pronounce death.
30. Ths process recklessly subjects condemned prisoners to multiple signficant and utterly unnecessary risks that they wil be torted to death. The Risks of ADC' s Chosen Lethal Injection Process
31. The risks associated with the ADC' s chosen execution process include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) First, in violation ofthe applicable medical standard of care regarding the use of painful drugs such as Potassium Chloride, the process fails to employ properly trained and skiled persons to carr out the necessar induction and maintenance of general
anesthesia.
Thopental is also known as Sodium Pentothal or Sodium Thiopental and wil be referred to as Thiopental in this Complaint. 10 Pancuronium Bromide is also known by a trade name, Pavulon.

(b) Second, the arrangement ofthe execution chamber, the condemned prisoner, the control room and all involved equipment is such that, even if properly trained persons were employed to induce and maintain an appropriate level of anesthesia, they would be physically unable to perform that function adequately. (c) Thrd, the process arbitrarly and unnecessarly uses drugs and drug dosages that create signficant risks that condemned prisoners wil suffer severe and completely
unnecessar pain during execution.
Because the Drugs Selected by the Director to Cause Death Are Painful Qualified Persons Must be Employed to Create and Maintain IV Access to Ensure Adequate Anesthesia. 32. The paricular drugs selected by the Director of the ADC to cause death in an execution by lethal injection cause severe physical pain when administered to the human body. When a concentrated dose of Potassium Chloride is injected intravenously it feels like a fire traveling through the vein to the heart. Death by Potassium Chloride poisoning is known to be so excruciating that the American Veternar Medical Association
A VM") prohibits the use of Potassium Chloride as the sole agent of euthanasia and, if
it is to be used at all, mandates that it only be used after the subject has reached a surgical plane of anesthesia. 33. Pancuronium Bromide is a neuromuscular blocking agent. When administered it paralyzes all voluntar muscles, including those necessar for breathing. Respiration is impossible. The drug in effect bures the recipient alive in a chemical tomb, where he is fully concious but unable to signal distress and unable to breathe, and eventually dies by asphyxiation. Death by asphyxiation involves intense, visceral pain and has, as a method of execution, been ruled unconstitutional as violative of the Eighth Amendment.

34. The risks associated with the use of neuromuscular blocking agents are well known in the

medical profession. The A VMA prohibits the use of neuromuscular blocking agents in combination with the barbiturate anesthetics on animals. Lethal injection can be humane

only if an anesthetic is administered which induces unconsciousness before

neuromuscular blockers stop respiration or Potassium Chloride is injected.

35.

Administration of

anesthesia requires proficiency at achieving and maintaining

access, because the potential sources of error are many. For example:

(a)

catheters must be inserted such that the tip is inside a vein and does not

penetrate through the vein wall into tissue. If a catheter is incorrectly placed, the

drugs flowing through the

lines can infitrate the tissue surounding the

catheter rather than correctly entering the vein, thus impeding the delivery of the

drug to the brain.

(b) Once inserted, the catheters are connected with extensive tubing to

fluid

bags. All mechancal components of the

system must operate correctly for the

drugs to be correctly delivered, but errors commonly occur:

tubing sometimes

leaks or becomes disconnected, or the drugs are introduced to the

system in the

wrong direction, preventing the drugs in the

line from reaching the patient in

the intended concentrations, or from reaching the patient at all.

(c) Upon information and belief, ADC employs unqualified persons to create access for executions. The protocol adopted by the Director states that the Deputy

Director for Health and Correctional Programs, or her designee, shall insert the intravenous infusion device into the prisoner; the protocol has no requirements

that such persons be trained to do so. Such persons are not competent

administer drugs intravenously and are not expert in the process of inserting and

maintaining

catheters. Once the execution commences, no one monitors the

catheters , leaving open the possibility that disconnected or clogged during the process.

catheters can become loose

(d) In the event that ADC employees cannot achieve

access via a peripheral

vein in a hand or ar, the ADC is wiling to create venous access through the

invasive and painful processes of inserting a percutaneous central line (tunneling

under the skin to reach the subclavian or central vein) or performing a surgical

cut-down (where a vein is exposed by incision). Because these technques of venous access require much more skill and training and are far more invasive than

peripheral vein access, they are normally performed only in highy equipped

emergency rooms or operating theaters.

(e) The ADC protocol fails to specify who has performed these procedures in the

past (and there has been at least one subclavian central line and at least one cut-
down performed) or who wil perform them in the futue, if necessar, and failed to guantee that those performing such procedures wil have the requisite training to protect condemed inates from unnecessar pain. Ths is especially risky given that it is not always possible to predict that there wil be difficulty obtaining

peripheral

access until attempts to establish such access are underway.

(f) Arkansas uses two lay-executioners to attach and plunge eight handheld syrnges, labeled only by number, in a complicated sequence in order to deliver

the deadly drugs. The use of untrained persons to label, attach and plunge

syrnges risks error in the sequence and rate of drug administration. Potential

line failures are also unguarded against because the executioners canot observe

the

site and monitor the condition of the

catheter for problems that may

develop such as infiltrations and blowouts and are not trained to interpret and

react appropriately to signs such as pressure feedback on the

lines.

36.

Training and experience in

drug administration are essential to ensuring that the

execution is a humane process free from gratuitous and unnecessar pain. The ADC'

personnel and executioners are not properly trained to administer intravenous drugs.

The Particular Chemical Cocktail Chosen by the Director Creates an Unnecessary Risk of Conscious Suffering During Execution

37. The Director of the ADC has arbitrarly selected thee drugs that, in the dosages

combinations, and procedures used, unnecessarily risk subjecting the prisoner to an

excruciatingly painful, tortous death.

38. The first drug, Thopental, is an ultra-short acting barbituate which acts to depress the

central nervous system to produce unconsciousness and anesthesia. Thiopental derives its

utility in surgical procedures from its rapid onset and rapid redistribution through the

body at surgical doses. Typically, Thiopental is used in the induction phase of anesthesia

to temporarily anesthetize patients for suffcient time to, for example, intubate the

trachea.

39. If it is necessar to maintain a patient in a surgical plane of anesthesia for longer than just

a few minutes, physicians tyically use drugs other than Thopental. If Thiopental is going to be used not only to induce, but also to maintain, a surgical plane of anesthesia, a

qualified person must be present to continually monitor the patient to ensure that the

Thiopental has been correctly administered and is maintaining the patient in a state of

unconsciousness. 40. The ADC protocol does not provide for any person, much less a properly trained
individual, to monitor the plane of anesthesia during execution. 41. The Director of the ADC has arbitrarly and needlessly selected a dose of Thiopental of
only 2 grams. Other jursdictions in the United States typically employ considerably larger doses of Thiopental than are used in Arkansas. For example, California administers 5 grams of Thiopental. The lower the dose of Thiopental used, the greater the risk that errors in preparation or administration of the drug wil result in inadequate anesthesia. For example, if a problem arses and half of a 5 gram dose does not reach its target, the prisoner stil receives 2. 5 grams, itself a large quantity. If, however, such an error occurs with the administration of a 2 gram dose, the prisoner receives only 1 gram a small enough quantity to risk consciousness in some condemned prisoners during the course of the execution. There is no legitimate reason for selecting a dose of Thiopental of only 2 grams. 42. The second drug, Pancuronium Bromide, is a neuromuscular blocking agent. Neuromuscular blocking agents are used clinically to induce skeletal muscle relaxation for purposes such as facilitating tracheal intubation or suppressing spontaneous respiration. 43. Neuromuscular blocking agents must be administered with great care and skil because they have no effect on consciousness or the ability to perceive pain. Moreover, the paralysis induced in the patient by the drug wil prevent anyone, even a person with advanced medical training, from ascertaining whether a patient is awake and capable of experiencing pain. Therefore, administration must be accompaned by adequate

anesthesia. 44. The effect of neuromuscular blocking agents in immobilizing patients and masking
external indications of their pain is well known. Patients who have been adminstered neuromuscular blocking agents with inadequate anesthesia have been conscious during
surgery and have reported terrfyng and tortous experiences where they were alert
experiencing pain, yet utterly immobilized and unable to signal their distress. 45. The consequences of erroneous administration of neuromuscular blocking agents is so
profound that at least eighteen states have baned by statute the use of such drugs in the
euthanasia of animals. The A VM never permits the use of neuromuscular blocking
agents in combination with barbituate anesthetics on anmals. In short, the ADC has settled on a protocol and procedure to kil the State s condemned prisoners that is considered too risky and dangerous for the euthanasia of pets. There is no need to risk the conscious suffocation of these prisoners as a result of the administration of neuromuscular blocking agents. Other drugs are available to satisfy Arkansas' statutory requirement for a "paralytic agent" that do not affect respiration. Using these alternate drugs would eliminate the risk that a condemned prisoner wil consciously asphyxiate.
46. The third drug, Potassium Chloride, contains essential blood ions and is tyically
administered medically in trace amounts as a necessar electrolyte. While a certain potassium level is important for normal cardiac electrcal activity, a rapid increase in blood concentration of potassium causes cardiac arrest. Injection of concentrated
potassium activates sensory nerve fibers, causing severe pain as the drug travels though
the venous system. There is universal medical agreement that, without anesthesia, an injection of a potassium chloride overdose would be excruciating.

47. The American Veterinary Medical Association is so confident that death by Potassium

Chloride wil cause unnecessar suffering that it prohibits its use as a euthanasia agent unless the practitioner administering the Potassium Chloride has the skil and training to

assure that the subject to be euthanized has reached a surgical plane of anesthesia.

48. The Arkansas statute does not require the administration of Potassium Chloride; the ADC

has arbitrarly and needlessly added the drug to the protocol and it has thereby increased the risk that executions wil be agonizingly painful.

The Defendants and the ADC Knew, Or Should Have Known, That Their Procedure Involves the Risk of, and has Resulted In, Conscious Suffering, Yet Have Failed to Correct the Execution Protocol to Minimie That Risk

49. The Defendants and the ADC knew, or should have known, that their execution process is

flawed in ways that risk causing conscious suffering but they have deliberately ignored

those risks and failed to make practicable modifications to the process. The Defendants

and the ADC have, or should have been, aware since the commencement of executions by

lethal injection that properly obtained and maintained

access is essential to a humane

procedure free from gratuitous, unnecessar pain, but they have nevertheless continued to

employ unqualified personnel to perorm this crucial par of the procedure.

50. The Defendants and the ADC knew, or should have known, since the commencement of

executions by lethal injection that, in light of the painful drugs that the Director has opted

to use, careful, skilled monitoring of the prisoner throughout the execution to ensure

continued maintenance of a surgical plane of anesthesia is necessar to ensure a humane

procedure free from gratuitous, unecessar pain. Nevertheless, the Defendants and the

ADC have neither provided for such monitoring by adequately trained personnel, nor

altered the design of the execution chamber and equipment to render adequate monitoring

physically possible.

51. The Defendants and the ADC knew, or should have known, since the commencement of executions by lethal injection that, drugs other than neuromuscular blocking agents or can

serve the statutory requirement of paralytic agents without risking that the prisoner wil
slowly, consciously asphyxiate and be unable to signal his distress, and that drugs other than the excruciating painful Potassium Chloride can be utilzed to induce cardiac arest. The Defendants and the ADC have nevertheless continued to employ these drugs

notwithstanding their simultaneous failure to ensure adequate anesthesia..

52. The Defendants and the ADC knew, or should have known, these facts because of the

documented instances of botched executions that they have performed, including those of

Rickey Ray Rector Ronald Gene Simmons, Steven Hil and Chrstina Riggs.

See

Paragraphs 14- 17, supra incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. They

knew, or should have know, of these facts because measured postmortem Thopental

blood concentrations, in some past cases, canot be reconciled with consistent

administration of Thopental and, in some cases, are inconsistent with antemortem

unconsciousness. The sum of the available execution data ( witness reports, postmortem Thopental levels, execution duration, weight, and other data) indicates that the ADC

protocol has resulted in a high frequency of failure to effectively anesthetize condemed

prisoners for the duration of their executions.
53. Botched executions involving unecessar conscious suffering are the inevitable result of

a protocol cobbled together in secret by people who are not qualified to conduct what is

essentially the surgical induction of anesthesia. The ADC protocol is flawed at nearly

every turn in that it: (1) uses unqualified personnel to insert

catheters; (2) uses

dangerous and unecessar drugs like neuromuscular blockers) in a reckless manner; (3 )
fails to take steps to assure that a surgical plane of anesthesia and an actual state of unconsciousness are achieved and continue for the duration of the execution before administering painful drugs; and (4) administers a dose of Thiopental that is
unnecessarly dangerously low.
54. The consequence of the ADC protocol is that many people are suffering when they are executed in Arkansas. They are suffering for more that the transitory period necessarly attendant to any death. People are suffering for prolonged periods as result of completely avoidable problems in protocol and procedure. It is possible to conduct execution by lethal injection in a maner that both complies with Arkansas ' statute and is humane , but the Defendants and the ADC have arbitrarly, capriciously, and unnecessarly devised a
protocol for carng out executions by lethal injection that fails to do so.
VII. Claims 55. By subjecting Plaintiff to an arbitrar, capricious and irrational method of execution that
creates an unecessar and signficant risk of inflicting agonizing and prolonged pain, and by designng and administering a process under which they wil inject Plaintiff with
chemicals in amounts, combinations, and in accordance with a protocol that unecessarly
risks conscious suffering and pain in the execution of a sentence of death, Defendants deprive Plaintiff of his rights under the Fifth, Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution to be free from cruel and unusual punshment and to be free from arbitrar and capricious processes. 56. By subjecting Plaintiff to an arbitrar, capricious, and irrational method of execution that creates an unecessar and signficant risk of inflicting agonizing and prolonged pain

Defendants, with deliberate indifference to Plaintiffs serious medical needs, violate

Plaintiffs right to be free from cruel and unusual punishment and the unnecessar and

wanton inflction of pain in violation of the Fifth, Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments of

the United States Constitution.

VIII.

Prayer for Relief

57. Wherefore, Plaintiff prays as follows:

58. That ths Honorable Court issue a judgement declarng that the Defendants ' protocols

policies, practices, and acts and omissions as described herein violate Plaintiffs rights as

guaranteed by the Fifth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution of the United States;

59. That this Honorable Cour permanently enjoin Defendants, their offcers, agents

employees, and successors in office, along with those acting in concert with them, from

engagig in the unawful practices described herein;

60. That ths Honorable Cour retain jursdiction over this cause until the Cour' s order is
cared out; and

61. That this Honorable Court afford any and all other such relief as this Court deems just

proper, and equitable under the circumstances.

Respectfully Submitted

JENNIFFER HORAN
Federal Defend

By:

Little Rock, AR 72201 (501) 324 6113
Counsel for Plaintiff, Terrck Terrell Nooner

