Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 1 of 31

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF ARKANSAS
PINE BLUFF DIVISION
TERRICK TERRELL NOONER
and
DON WILLIAM DAVIS,

Plaintiffs,

v.

Civil Action No. 5:06-cv-00110-SWW-JFF

LARRY NORRIS, et al.,

Defendants.

APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION Plaintiff, Don William Davis, is under a sentence of death. Mr. Davis moved to intervene in the instant action on May 4, 2006, and the Court granted the Motion on May 26, 2006. In the interim, on May 11, 2006, the Governor of the State of Arkansas scheduled Mr. Davis’ execution to take place on July 5, 2006. Mr. Davis seeks preliminary injunctive relief to prevent Defendants from executing him by their proposed means of lethal injection pending the resolution of this action. Mr. Davis alleges that the Arkansas Department of Correction’s lethal injection protocol, as described in Administrative Directive 96-06, which is attached hereto as Exhibit 1, constitutes cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments because it creates a substantial and unnecessary risk that Mr. Davis will be fully conscious and in agonizing pain for the duration of the execution process This application for a preliminary injunction is made pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 65, and Mr. Davis is entitled to the relief he seeks under Eighth Circuit precedent. Mr.

1

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 2 of 31
Davis will sustain irreparable harm if injunctive relief is not granted preventing the Defendants from conducting his execution in accordance with Administrative Directive 96-06. Mr. Davis is likely to prevail on the merits of the underlying action and the balance of hardships weighs decidedly in his favor. This application is based on the Complaint, the following memorandum of points and authorities and the attached exhibits, including the declaration of Dr. Mark Heath which sets forth the specific deficiencies in the Defendants’ lethal injection protocol. I. INTRODUCTION
Don William Davis, a death row inmate, is scheduled to be executed by the Arkansas Department of Correction by means of lethal injection. A rapidly growing body of evidence, including medical evidence, eyewitness observation and veterinary studies, persuasively demonstrates that the particular lethal injection protocol chosen by Defendant Norris risks, and has repeatedly resulted in, inmates failing to receive adequate anesthesia and remaining conscious during the administration of the lethal drugs. Without adequate anesthesia, the inmate experiences first slow suffocation and then the extraordinarily painful activation of the sensory nerve fibers in the walls of the veins that is caused by potassium chloride. Given the significant danger under the current protocol that he will be subjected to this excruciating pain and torture, Mr. Davis seeks to prevent the Defendants from executing him in this manner.
Administrative Directive 96-06 calls for the use of three drugs in succession: first, Sodium Pentothal, an ultrashort-acting barbiturate that under ideal conditions will cause the inmate to lose consciousness; second, Pancuronium Bromide, a neuromuscular blocking agent that paralyzes the muscles and has no apparent purpose other than to make the execution appear peaceful to witnesses; and finally, Potassium Chloride, which induces cardiac arrest.
2

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 3 of 31
Administrative Directive 96-06 also establishes the conditions under which these drugs are administered. It directs that specified dosages of the drugs be administered remotely, in the absence of trained personnel and with no monitoring of the inmate’s condition once the procedure is underway. The combination of using these particular drugs, in these dosages and under these conditions, creates a serious risk that the drugs, particularly the critically important Sodium Pentothal, will not be properly administered. Administration errors could result, and demonstrably have resulted, in inmates retaining consciousness and suffering severe pain and torture during their executions.
Thus, Mr. Davis’s suit is not premised on the possibility that some unforeseen error or unavoidable accident might cause him to be aware and in excruciating pain during his execution. Nor does he claim that execution by lethal injection is unconstitutional per se, regardless of the manner in which it is accomplished. On the contrary, he alleges that the significant risk of a botched and inhumane execution is an entirely foreseeable consequence of the particular conditions unnecessarily imposed by, and the failings of, Administrative Directive 96-06. It is surely unconstitutional for the State to choose an execution protocol that creates a significant risk of inflicting gratuitous suffering and excruciating pain. Mr. Davis therefore requests that the Court enjoin the Defendants from executing him by means of lethal injection as it is currently administered under Administrative Directive 96-06. II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
In 1992, Don William Davis was convicted in the Circuit Court of Benton County, Arkansas, of Capital Murder, Burglary and Theft of Property in connection with the October 12, 1990, shooting death of Jane Daniel at her home in Rogers. The jury thereafter sentenced Mr.
3

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 4 of 31
Davis to death. The Arkansas Supreme Court affirmed the convictions and sentence on direct appeal in 1993, see Davis v. State, 863 S.W.2d 259 (Ark. 1995), and affirmed the denial of state post-conviction relief in 2001, see Davis v. State, 44 S.W.3d 726 (Ark. 2001).
Mr. Davis filed a petition for writ of habeas corpus in the United States District Court for the Western District of Arkansas on April 1, 2002. Chief Judge Jimm Larry Hendren denied the petition in full on January 28, 2004, and the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed on September 14, 2005. See Davis v. Norris, 423 F.3d 868 (8th Cir. 2005). The Supreme Court denied Mr. Davis’ motion for permission to file a petition for certiorari out of time on April 17, 2006.
Plaintiff Terrick Terrell Nooner filed the Complaint in the instant action on May 1, 2006. Mr. Davis thereafter moved to intervene as a plaintiff on May 4, 2006. While that Motion was pending before this Court, on May 11, 2006, Governor Mike Huckabee announced that he had scheduled Mr. Davis’s execution for July 5, 2006. The Court granted leave for Mr. Davis to intervene on May 26, 2006.
Currently pending before this Court is Defendants’ Motion to Dismiss, filed on May 19, 2006. Plaintiffs filed their Response in Opposition to that Motion on June 2, 2006. III. ARGUMENT
In moving for a preliminary injunction, Mr. Davis seeks only to preserve the status quo while he litigates his constitutional claims. Mr. Nooner and Mr. Davis are both likely to succeed on the merits of this action, and Mr. Davis will suffer irreparable harm in the absence of temporary relief. It is also in the public interest to grant temporary relief because doing so will allow the important question of the constitutionality of Administrative Directive 96-06 to be fully
4

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 5 of 31
and accurately resolved on the merits and will avoid an inhumane, unconstitutional execution. This action was timely brought and the balance of equities so favors Mr. Davis that both justice and controlling precedent require that the Court preserve the status quo until the merits of the matter can be determined.
A. THE LEGAL STANDARD In order to decide whether a preliminary injunction is appropriate, the Court must consider “(1) the threat of irreparable harm to the movant; (2) the state of balance between this harm and the injury that granting the injunction will inflict on other parties litigant; (3) the probability that movant will succeed on the merits; and (4) the public interest.” Dataphase Systems, Inc. v. C L Systems, Inc., 640 F.2d 109, 114 (8th Cir. 1981)(en banc). The necessary showing of likelihood of success depends upon the balance of threatened harms; accordingly, “where the movant has raised a substantial question and the equities are otherwise strongly in his favor, the showing of success on the merits can be less.” Id. at 113. In the context of a capital case, where the movant is under a death sentence and the issuance of a preliminary injunction will have the effect of delaying a scheduled execution, the Court must also take into account any unnecessary delay on the part of the prisoner in bringing his claim. Nelson v. Campbell, 541 U.S. 637, 649-650 (2004); Hill v. McDonough, 547 U.S. (2006). The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals performed this weighing of the equities in the functionally identical case of Taylor v. Crawford, 445 F.3d 1095, 1097 (8th Cir. 2006). See also Taylor v. Crawford, No. 06-1397 (8th Cir. February 1, 2006)(en banc)(Order granting stay of execution). Plaintiff Taylor filed an action pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 challenging Missouri’s lethal injection protocol on substantially the same grounds that Mr. Davis has challenged
5

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 6 of 31
Arkansas’ procedure. See Taylor, 445 F.3d at 1096. As here, while the action was pending the state scheduled Mr. Taylor’s execution. Id. at 1097. The district court granted a preliminary injunction preventing the execution from proceeding before the merits of the action had been determined. Id. A panel of the Eighth Circuit initially reversed and ordered that an immediate, truncated hearing be conducted to allow the execution to proceed on schedule, id., but on the subsequent appeal the en banc court granted rehearing and stayed Mr. Taylor’s execution, id. at 1098.
Upon reconsideration the panel affirmatively acknowledged that the plaintiff’s interest in having an evidentiary hearing on the merits of his claims prior to his execution was “equally [as] strong” as the State’s interest in the prompt execution of its judgment. Id. at 1096. The court inquired of the parties how much time they would need to complete the discovery and evidentiary hearing that had previously begun, and ultimately granted the 60 days that plaintiff’s counsel requested. Id. at 1098. This decision, then, stands for the proposition that a plaintiff who timely files a properly-pled 8th and 14th Amendment challenge to a state’s lethal injection procedure under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 is entitled to an evidentiary hearing on the merits of his claims and, if the State schedules his execution in the interim, a preliminary injunction to prevent the State from proceeding with the execution before the hearing can be completed. See also Cooey v. Taft, 2006 WL 1207982 (S.D.Ohio); Jackson v. Taylor, 2006 WL 1237044 (D.Del.). As discussed in the Opposition to Motion to Dismiss, [Document 20], the suit brought by Mr. Nooner and Mr. Davis is both timely filed and properly-pled, and this Court should therefore issue the preliminary injunction.
6

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 7 of 31
B. PLAINTIFF IS LIKELY TO SUCCEED ON THE MERITS 1. Plaintiff’s Claim Is Cognizable Under 42 U.S.C. § 1983
The Complaint does not challenge the legality of Mr. Davis’ conviction or sentence, nor does it seek to prevent the state from executing him by lethal injection in a lawful manner. Any doubt that Mr. Davis’ claim is therefore properly brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 was removed this morning by the United States Supreme Court which announced its decision in Hill v. McDonough, 547 U.S. (2006). In accordance with its previous opinion in Nelson v. Campbell, 541 U.S. 637 (2004), the Court held that a claim challenging a method of execution as cruel and unusual punishment that “would not necessarily prevent the State from executing him by lethal injection,” is proper under § 1983 and need not be brought in habeas. Hill, Slip Op. at 5. As is clear from the Complaint, the instant lawsuit is just such an action. Mr. Davis and Mr. Nooner have specifically alleged that there are readily available alternative methods of execution by lethal injection that would both comport with state law and pass constitutional muster. They bring this action simply to ensure that they are put to death in a humane manner.
2. Arkansas’ Lethal Injection Protocol Violates the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments Because it Carries a Tremendous Risk of Unnecessary Pain During Executions
The Eighth Amendment, applicable to the States through the Fourteenth Amendment, prohibits the imposition of cruel and unusual punishments. U.S. Const. Amend. VIII. The prohibition includes the “infliction of unnecessary pain in the execution of the death sentence.” Louisiana ex rel. Francis v. Resweber, 329 U.S. 459, 463 (1974); see also Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 173 (1976)(holding that the Eighth Amendment prohibits the “unnecessary and wanton infliction of pain”).
7

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 8 of 31
Because it is impossible to determine with certainty before the fact whether a particular inmate will suffer unnecessary pain during his execution, the question of whether a particular execution procedure will inflict unnecessary pain is fundamentally an inquiry as to whether the inmate is “subject to an unnecessary risk of unconstitutional pain or suffering.” Cooper v. Rimmer, 379 F.3d 1029, 1033 (9th Cir. 2004)(emphasis added); Fierro v. Gomez, 77 F. 3d 301, 307 (9th Cir. 1996) (“Campbell also made clear that the method of execution must be considered in terms of the risk of pain.” (emphasis in original)); Campbell v. Wood, 18 F.3d 662, 687 (9th Cir. 1994). “For any individual challenging a death sentence, evidence of botched executions can only be put in terms of probability.” J.D. Mortenson, Earning the Right to be Retributive: Execution Methods, Culpability Theory, and the Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause, 88 Iowa L. Rev. 1099, 1118-20 (2003).
Of course, any medical or quasi-medical procedure inherently carries a risk that a mistake or accident might cause unforeseen pain. Thus, the Eighth Amendment does not require executioners to eliminate all possible risk of pain or accident from their execution protocols. See Resweber, 329 U.S. at 464; Campbell, 18 F.3d at 687. A risk of pain becomes unnecessary, however - and unconstitutional - when experience with the execution procedure demonstrates that there are foreseeable problems that will result in the inmate suffering intense pain that alternative procedures do not engender.
The assessment of the risks associated with a particular procedure is not static. Over time, our knowledge of the workings of the human body increases, technology advances, new information comes to light and old information is more thoroughly understood and interpreted. Accordingly, methods of execution are developed, refined and abandoned. Execution by
8

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 9 of 31
hanging, firing squad, gas chamber and electric chair, once standard, have all become virtually obsolete with the passage of time. If a State opts to utilize capital punishment, the 8th Amendment imposes an obligation upon it to keep up with and respond to new developments and information and to ensure that they are using the most humane, least painful procedure available. Evidence is now overwhelming that the particular lethal injection protocol chosen and currently in use by the ADC is far from the most humane available; rather, it engenders serious risks of causing excruciating pain and torture that other available methods simply do not. See Cooey v. Taft, No. 2:04-cv-1156, 2006 WL 1207982 * 5 (S.D.Ohio April 28)(noting “mounting evidence calling Ohio’s lethal injection protocol, and the same or similar protocols employed by other states, increasingly into question”).
a. The Protocol Is Old And Was Ill-Conceived At The Outset Legislation directing a change in the method of execution from electrocution to lethal injection was passed in Arkansas in 1983. As it does to this day, the statute left all decisions regarding the particular chemicals to be injected and the administration procedures to be employed to the discretion of the Director of the Department of Correction. See Ark. Code Ann. § 5-4-617(a)(1983). The legislation originally proposed contained a provision directing the Director of the Department of Correction to consult with the State Medical and Pharmacy Boards before making the determination of which substances should be administered and what procedures should be followed. See Doug Smith, Pharmacy College’s Dean Resents Role in Execution Thrust Unasked on School, ARKANSAS GAZETTE, March 5, 1983, at 1A, 13A (Exhibit 2). However, lobbying by physicians unwilling to be involved in the execution business resulted in the College of Pharmacy at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences being substituted
9

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 10 of 31
as the consulting Agency. Id. The legislation containing this provision passed, but the College of Pharmacy was
outraged. Dean Larry D. Milne was vocal in his opposition to involving his institution in the execution process, id., and virtually the entire faculty signed a petition objecting to the legislation, see May Not Sign Injection Bill, Clinton Says, ARKANSAS GAZETTE, March 12, 1983, at 2A (Exhibit 3). The bill was recalled, and ultimately an amended version was passed that contained no requirement that the Director consult with knowledgeable parties. Sponsor Recalls Lethal Injection Bill, ARKANSAS GAZETTE, March 15, 1983, at 3A (Exhibit 4); Clinton Signs Injection Bill, Six Additional Measures, ARKANSAS GAZETTE, March 26, 1983, at 8A (Exhibit 5). Senator John F. Bearden, Jr., the sponsor of the legislation, was unperturbed, telling media representatives that designing a lethal injection protocol is “‘pretty simple. All you have to do is pick up the phone and call Texas.’” Sponsor Recalls Lethal Injection Bill, ARKANSAS GAZETTE, March 15, 1983, at 3A (Exhibit 4). The protocol was thus designed with no input or advice from medically trained personnel in Arkansas.
Similarly, the Texas protocol upon which the Arkansas procedure was apparently modeled was designed by lay corrections officials with no medical knowledge. Louisiana is another state that looked to Texas when it came time to figure out how to execute someone by lethal injection. When the chief legal counsel of the Louisiana Department of Corrections consulted with the warden of the Texas Department of Corrections responsible for executions about the “medical portion” of the Texas protocol, she was told:
‘[T]hat the only thing that mattered was that the guy ended up dead and that he wasn’t worried too much about the amount of medicine. He had certainly used the same types of medicine, but that he wasn’t totally concerned about the
10

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 11 of 31
amounts or what it may or may not do. They ended up dead, and that’s all he was worried about. The rest of our conversation with him tracked that same thing. He was not terribly concerned about policy, procedure, or who did what, when, where. Just so the right result happened.’ So Long as They Die: Lethal Injections in the United States, 18 Human Rights Watch 1(G) at 1617 (2006)(Exhibit 6). The Department of Correction has used the protocol adopted in this ad hoc, unscientific manner for all executions by lethal injection conducted in Arkansas, and still uses that same procedure. See Motion to Dismiss at 4 [Document 13](“Since 1983, the protocol used for executions has basically remained unchanged”).
b. The Protocol Arbitrarily Selects Painful Drugs And Fails To Ensure Adequate Anesthesia During Their Administration
As noted above, the Arkansas lethal injection statute, Ark. Code Ann. § 5-4-617, requires only that the chemicals administered to cause death include an ultra-short-acting barbiturate and a chemical paralytic agent. The choice of drugs and drug dosages is made by Defendant Norris. Ark. Code Ann. § 5-4-617(a)(2)(“The Director of the Department of Correction shall determine the substances to be uniformly administered and the procedures to be used in any execution”). The drugs and dosages chosen by Defendant Norris, in order of administration, are as follows:
1. 2 g Sodium Pentothal; 2. 10-15cc Normal Saline; 3. 50 mg Pancuronium Bromide; 4. 50 mg Pancuronium Bromide; 5. 10-15cc Normal Saline;
11

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 12 of 31
6. 50 meqs (milliequivalents) Potassium Chloride; 7. 50 meqs Potassium Chloride; 8. 50 meqs Potassium Chloride. ADC Administrative Directive 96-06 (Exhibit 1). The first drug, Sodium Pentothal, is an anesthetic, intended to rapidly induce unconsciousness. The second active drug, Pancuronium Bromide, is a neuromuscular blocking agent that causes complete paralysis. Finally, Potassium Chloride is introduced to cause cardiac arrest. Potassium Chloride is a salt that naturally occurs in trace amounts in the human body. In large quantities, however, such as the 100 meqs called for by Administrative Directive 96-06, it not only causes the heart to stop beating but also causes excruciating pain as it travels through the circulatory system. The drug activates the sensory nerve fibers of the insides of the veins as it courses through the body from the injection site to the heart, causing a sensation that has been likened to fire scorching along the vessels. See Exhibit 7 at ¶12 (Declaration of Dr. Mark Heath). The neuromuscular blocking agent Pancuronium Bromide stops all movement, including that necessary to breathe. The drug has no effect, however, on consciousness or the ability to perceive pain. If a prisoner is conscious when this drug is administered, he will feel the visceral pain and distress of slow suffocation, much like as if he were drowning or being crushed to death. Id. at ¶15. Having made the choice to administer two drugs that cause excruciating pain and agony, a choice that was not required by either statute or practical considerations, the ADC can fulfill its responsibility under the 8th Amendment to avoid gratuitous and unnecessary pain and torture
12

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 13 of 31
only if it ensures that the prisoner is adequately anesthetized at the time that those drugs are administered. In order to ensure that the prisoner does not feel pain a surgical plane of anesthesia, or that level of anesthesia that prevents conscious perception of noxious stimuli of the magnitude of surgical procedures, must be achieved and maintained throughout the execution procedure. However, the drug that the ADC has chosen to induce anesthesia, administered in accordance with the procedures under which the ADC has chosen to administer it, is an exceedingly inferior choice for the task and fails to provide the necessary assurance of adequate anesthesia.
i. Sodium Pentothal is an Ultra-Short-Acting Barbiturate Unsuitable for use as Sole Anesthetic Agent for Executions, Especially in the Dose Used by the ADC
Sodium Pentothal is an ultra-short-acting barbiturate that is used for certain specific purposes in surgical anesthesia. Its effect has a rapid onset and then a rapid recovery; the patient becomes unconscious very quickly after the drug is introduced, and the effects begin to wear off very soon thereafter. Sodium Pentothal is therefore ideal for the provision of anesthesia during intubation at the beginning of surgery, for example, because it induces deep anesthesia rapidly but if there are problems with the intubation the patient will regain consciousness and the ability to breathe independently very quickly. See Exhibit 7 at ¶ 24-25 (Declaration of Dr. Heath).
The reasons for the drug’s utility in certain surgical contexts, however, are also reasons why Sodium Pentothal is decidedly inappropriate for use as the sole anesthetic agent during a lethal injection procedure. Id. at ¶ 26-27. Although the Arkansas protocol calls for a dose of the drug that is large enough to be lethal if properly administered, any problems with the delivery of the full dose engender the serious risk that the inmate will receive an insufficient amount of the
13

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 14 of 31
drug to induce a deep enough plane of anesthesia, or to maintain that degree of anesthesia throughout the execution process. In short, if the inmate does not receive the full amount of Sodium Pentothal, and there are many reasons why that can and apparently does happen, the anesthetic effect may wear off too quickly and the inmate may be conscious and suffering during the remainder of the procedure.
The ADC’s protocol unnecessarily enhances these risks by its arbitrary and unnecessary adoption of 2 grams as the does of Sodium Pentothol to be administered, as distinguished from the 3 grams or 5 grams that is typically given in other jurisdictions that conduct executions by lethal injection. See, e.g., Taylor v. Crawford, 445 F.3d 1095, 1097 (8th Cir. 2006)(noting that Missouri’s lethal injection protocol calls for 5 grams of sodium pentothal); Morales v. Hickman, 438 F.3d 926, 928 (9th Cir. 2006)((noting that California’s lethal injection protocol calls for 5 grams of sodium pentothal); Cooey v. Taft, 2006 WL 1207982 at * 4 (noting that Ohio’s lethal injection protocol calls for 2 grams of sodium pentothal, less than the 5 grams called for by California and the 3 grams used by North Carolina). Although concerns about the selection of this particular drug apply regardless of the size of the dose of sodium thiopental that is prescribed under the protocol, the ADC’s arbitrary decision to administer only 2 grams unduly decreases the margin of error and the increases the risk that inadequate anesthesia will be achieved.
The level of anesthesia, if any, achieved in each individual inmate depends on the amount that is successfully administered, although other factors such as the inmate’s weight and sensitivity/resistance to barbiturates are also important. Many foreseeable situations exist in which human or technical errors could result in the failure to successfully administer the intended dose. If error occurs that results in the prisoner receiving only half of a 5 gram dose, the prisoner
14

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 15 of 31
will still receive 2.5 grams and adequate anesthesia will likely occur despite the error. If the same error occurs and the prisoner receives only half of a 2 gram dose, however, the risks of inadequate anesthesia and conscious suffering are significant. Exhibit 7 at ¶ 27 (Declaration of Dr. Heath)
Additionally, the ADC’s protocol fails to even require that additional Sodium Thiopental be available in the execution chamber in the event that problems with delivery of the dose are detected and more of the anesthetic agent is determined to be necessary. Because of its instability, the drug is distributed in powder form and must be placed into solution before it may be injected. Id. at ¶ 27 (a). Administrative Directive 96-06 fails to require even that extra Sodium Pentothol powder be on hand, much less extra syringes of the drug already mixed into solution, and so in the event that execution personnel were to detect signs of inadequate anesthetic depth or possible consciousness once the execution process was under way, the protocol ensures that there is nothing they could do about it. As noted, the circumstances under which a failure to achieve and maintain adequate anesthesia may occur are many, varied and common.
ii. Obtaining IV Access for Execution Purposes Requires Training and Skill that ADC Execution Personnel Lack
Establishing peripheral intravenous access to an inmate to facilitate the administration of the lethal drugs called for by Administrative Directive 96-06 is a complex and risky medical procedure that should only be performed by properly medically trained and qualified personnel. The process is fraught with the potential for error. Under the best of circumstances, it is vital that the iv set-up be assembled properly and securely. The set-up consists of multiple parts and
15

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 16 of 31
pieces of tubing, which may leak or otherwise fail to permit the unobstructed flow of chemicals into the inmate’s circulatory system if not correctly attached. See Exhibit 7 at ¶ 27(e) (Declaration of Dr. Heath).
The tourniquet that is applied to facilitate access to the peripheral vein must be removed once iv access is achieved; failure to do so will obstruct the flow of the anesthetic agent into the inmate’s body. See Id. at ¶ 27(k). There is reason to believe that the executioners have failed to remove the tourniquet in at least one execution conducted by the ADC; the Medical Examiner’s report of the autopsy of Darrell Richley states that the tourniquet was still present on Mr. Richley’s arm when his body was received at the morgue following his execution. See Exhibit 8 (Medical Examiner’s Report of Autopsy - Darrell Richley). A similar problem may occur due to placement of the extensive restraining straps that the ADC uses to tie the inmate down to the gurney. See Exhibit 7 at ¶ 27(l)(Declaration of Dr. Heath).
It is critical that the catheter be inserted into the vein in precisely correct fashion in order to ensure that the full dose of the anesthetic drug is delivered into the inmate’s circulatory system. If the catheter is inserted incorrectly, the drug will go into the tissue surrounding the vein rather than into the vein itself. See id. at ¶ 27(f). This condition, known as infiltration, is not uncommon. Id. Uncorrected, it will result in a failure of the anesthetic to reach the central nervous system and a failure to render the inmate unconscious. Id. Once properly inserted, the catheter must be adequately secured with tape or by other means, or else it may shift and result in infiltration. Id. at ¶ 27(j).
Even finding a suitable peripheral vein into which the catheter may be placed can be a medically complex and difficult endeavor. See, e.g., Exhibit 9 (Post-Mortem Photograph of
16

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 17 of 31
Riley Noel). Due to a variety of conditions, including obesity, prior intravenous drug use, corticosteroid treatment and even just naturally small or deep veins, obtaining peripheral iv access may be difficult or even impossible. Id. at ¶ 36. The very nature of the execution process may exacerbate this problem, because the autonomic manifestations of the anxiety associated with impending death include constriction or narrowing of the veins. Id. at ¶ 41.
In the event that peripheral iv access proves impossible to obtain, most States’ protocols call for the use of dramatically more medically complex, risky and invasive procedures such as a cut-down, which entails making a deep incision into the inmate’s skin in order to access a vein that is not accessible from the surface, or a central line, which requires insertion of the catheter into a large vein such as the subclavian vein in the chest or the femoral vein in the groin. Indeed, both of these procedures have been conducted in Arkansas by the ADC. See Exhibits 10, 11, 12 (Post-mortem Photographs of Ricky Ray Rector); Exhibit 13 (Autopsy Report of Ricky Ray Rector); Exhibits 14, 15, 16 (Post-mortem Photographs of Clay Smith); Exhibit 17 (Autopsy Report of Clay Smith).
Despite the complexity of and risks associated with these types of procedures, see Exhibit 7 at ¶¶ 36-41(Declaration of Dr. Heath), and their demonstrable necessity in at least two of the last 26 executions in Arkansas, Administrative Directive 96-06 fails to set forth any procedures whatsoever governing the use of these techniques. The protocol fails to specify who will decide if such measures are necessary, to prescribe how they are to be conducted or to set forth the qualifications required of the personnel who will actually perform them. Given the nature of the procedures it is unacceptable that they be performed by anyone except for medically trained personnel possessed of adequate skill and experience, but the protocol fails to require any
17

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 18 of 31
particular knowledge or ability at all. iii. Maintenance of Adequate Anesthesia Throughout the Execution Process Requires Training and Skill that ADC Execution Personnel Lack
Even once peripheral iv access has been established and the catheters are properly inserted, there are still a large number of problems that may arise that may interfere with the proper delivery of anesthesia. It is critical, therefore, that the inmate be closely monitored by medically trained and experienced personnel throughout the execution process in order to detect problems as they occur and ensure that the inmate is maintained on a sufficiently deep plane of anesthesia. See Exhibit 7 at ¶¶ 31-32 (Declaration of Dr. Heath). Even most qualified nurses and paramedics are not trained in the use of ultrashort-acting barbiturates; these drugs are used only by anesthesiologists and a very select group of nurses who have obtained significant experience in intensive care units and as nurse anesthetists. Id. at ¶ 30. Training equivalent to that of an anesthesiologist or a CRNA is minimally required in order to ensure that an execution using the drugs and procedure selected by Defendant Norris is humane. Id. However, the ADC’s protocol fails to provide for any monitoring of the inmate during the execution process, much less monitoring by individuals competent in the provision of general anesthesia.
Errors and problems are potentially rife beginning at the stage of preparation of the lethal drugs. Sodium Thiopental is unstable in solution, and is therefore distributed by the manufacturer in powder form. Before it may be injected intravenously, the powder must be mixed with liquid, a process that requires knowledge of pharmaceuticals and familiarity with terminology and abbreviations. Id. at ¶ 27(a). Administrative Directive 96-06 provides no guidance to execution personnel on this issue, stating only that “the powder be dissolved in ‘the
18

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 19 of 31
least amount of clear diluent possible to attain complete, clear suspension.’” Id. No instructions are given as to how much fluid that might be or how the person performing the mixing should determine how much to use or how success has been achieved. Id.
The ADC’s protocol requires that, once mixed, the drugs be placed in a series of numbered syringes. Id. at ¶ 27(b); Exhibit 19 (Photograph of Syringes). No other indication of the contents of the syringes is placed on them, which means that if a drug is erroneously placed in a syringe of the incorrect number, the error is likely to go undetected and the drugs will be administered in the wrong order. Id. Such labeling is far below the appropriate medical standard of care and would never be permitted in the clinical context. Administration of the drugs in the wrong order may also result from the fact that each syringe is a separate unit that must be attached in series to the iv setup by hand. Exhibits 20, 21, 22 (Photographs of Syringes and IV Tubing). The protocol wholly fails to guard against the possibility that the executioner might select the incorrect syringe, to provide for monitoring of the inmate to ensure that such an error is immediately detected if it occurs, or to prescribe the steps to be taken if such a situation is detected. See Exhibit 7 at ¶ 27(c)(Declaration of Dr. Heath)
If the lethal drugs are administered in the wrong order a range of negative consequences may ensue. Several of the numbered syringes are supposed to contain saline solution to be administered between drugs in order to flush the iv lines of all traces of the preceding agent. Of primary importance is the fact that, if mixed with Pancuronium Bromide outside of the body, Sodium Pentothol will precipitate, i.e. solids will form in the solution, impairing or preventing delivery of the full dose of anesthetic agent. Hence, if error in the selection of syringes results in the introduction of Pancuronium Bromide before the line has been flushed with saline solution,
19

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 20 of 31
inadequate anesthesia may result. The ADC’s lethal injection protocol requires that the executioners who inject the lethal
drugs into the iv set up be located in a room that is apart from the execution chamber where the inmate is placed on the gurney, separated by a window with a hole in it for the iv lines to pass through. Exhibit 23 (Photograph of Execution Chamber). Because of the distance between the inmate and the executioners that this procedure necessitates, extended iv tubing is required. The introduction of extra length and components to the iv set-up not only increases the number of sites where leakage may occur, see Exhibit 7 at ¶ 27(e)(Declaration of Dr. Heath), but also increases the risk that the tubing may coil or kink.
Even when properly placed initially, the tip of an iv catheter may migrate during the course of the execution so that it is outside of the vein at the time of the introduction of the anesthetic agent and infiltration occurs. See Exhibit 7 at ¶ 27(g)(Declaration of Dr. Heath). Although the catheter appears to be securely and properly placed, too, the process of inserting it may weaken or damage the vein wall such that the vein ruptures when the administration of the lethal drugs begins. Id. at ¶ 27(h). This risk is increased by the fact that inexperienced, untrained personnel may exert excessive pressure on the syringe plungers, increasing the velocity of the administration of te drug and consequently the pressure that is placed on the vein walls. Id. Indeed, excessive pressure on the plunger can lead to tearing or rupture of the vein even in the absence of damage caused by the initial insertion of the catheter. Id. at ¶ 27(i).
Because of each of these potential problems and more, constant, close monitoring of the inmate’s plane of anesthesia throughout the execution process by individuals who are properly trained and skilled in anesthesiology is indispensable. And yet, the Defendants’ protocol fails to
20

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 21 of 31
provide for any monitoring at all once the execution is underway, much less monitoring by personnel who have the requisite knowledge and experience to detect and rectify any problems that may arise them.
iv. Even if ADC Personnel Were Qualified to Administer IV Anesthesia, the Use of Pancuronium Bromide and the Physical Arrangement of the Execution Chamber Preclude Effective Monitoring
Not only does the ADC’s lethal injection protocol fail to provide for monitoring of the inmate by persons qualified in assessing anesthetic depth, it calls for a physical arrangement of inmate and executioners that would unnecessarily hinder effective monitoring even if it were attempted. As noted, the protocol requires that the executioners who inject the lethal drugs into the iv set-up be located in a room that is apart from the execution chamber where the inmate is placed on the gurney, separated by a window with a hole in it for the iv lines to pass through. Exhibit 23 (Photograph of Execution Chamber). The persons who control the administration of the drugs, then, are the furthest away of any execution chamber personnel and their line of sight to the inmate is impeded. See Exhibit 7 at ¶ 27(e)(Declaration of Dr. Heath). The distance entirely precludes the close monitoring of the diagnostic signs of anesthetic depth that are constantly checked during surgical procedures
d. The Risk of Torture and Pain Created by Administrative Directive 96-06 Has Been Realized in Executions in Arkansas and Elsewhere
There is now ample evidence that Administrative Directive 96-06 has caused some inmates executed in Arkansas to experience unnecessary pain and suffering during their executions. Both execution records and witnesses' accounts of these executions provide evidence that is indicative of continued consciousness following the purported administration of the
21

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 22 of 31
sodium pentothal. A dose of Sodium Pentothal of 2mg or more, properly administered, will cause unconsciousness within one minute or less. Exhibit 7 at ¶ 42 (Declaration of Mark Heath). However, in several executions that have been performed in Arkansas, the inmate displayed signs of consciousness for considerably longer that the one minute maximum that is indicative of successful administration of the anesthetic.
Ronald Gene Simmons was executed by the State of Arkansas on June 25, 1990. Exhibits 24, 25, 26 (Post-mortem Photographs of Ronald Gene Simmons). The administration of the lethal chemicals began at 9:02pm. Exhibit 27 (Medical Examiner’s Consultation and Investigation Form - Ronald Gene Simmons). Between 9:02 and 9:04pm, according to an eyewitness, Mr. Simmons appeared to nod off into unconsciousness. However, “at 9:05pm he called out ‘Oh! Oh!’ and began to cough sporadically as though he might be having difficulty breathing. During the next two minutes, he coughed slightly, approximately 20 times, each cough heaving his stomach slightly and causing the gurney to shake a little.” Bill Simmons, Stoic Murderer Meets His Fate by Quiet Means, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT, June 26, 1990, at 9A (Exhibit 28). Mr. Simmons became still at 9:07pm, after which his face and arm turned first blue and then purple. An ADC employee twice appeared to adjust the IV tube in Mr. Simmons’ arm, and not until 9:19pm was Mr. Simmons pronounced dead by the coroner. Id.; Exhibit 28.
According to Dr. Heath, the typical reaction to the administration of sodium pentothal is yawning, drawing one or two deep breaths, or visibly exhaling so that the cheeks puff out. Exhibit 7 at ¶ 44. (Declaration of Mark Heath M.D.) Obviously, audibly vocalizing is not consistent with unconsciousness. Also, irregular heaving of the chest is not consistent with the depression of the central nervous system caused by sodium pentothal. Id. Rather, chest heaving is indicative of labored respiratory activity, which in turn strongly suggests that Mr. Simmons was conscious, and indeed may have been laboring against the paralyzing effect of the pancuronium bromide. Id.
22

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 23 of 31
Just under two years later, on January 24, 1992, Rickey Ray Rector was put to death in Arkansas. The execution took one hour and 9 minutes to complete, during which time Mr. Rector’s hands and arms were punctured no less than 10 separate times by ADC personnel searching for a suitable vein in which to place the IV line. Exhibits 10, 29, 30, 31 (Post-mortem Photographs of Ricky Ray Rector); Exhibit 13 (Autopsy Report of Ricky Ray Rector) The catheter was finally inserted into a vein in Mr. Rector’s hand, Exhibits 32, 33, 12, but not before a deep incision, a “cut-down,” was made in his arm, Exhibits 10, 11, 12. The curtains between the execution chamber and the witness room remained closed during the 50 minutes it took to place the IV line, but witnesses heard Mr. Rector’s loud moans as his skin was repeatedly pierced. Sonja Clinesmith, Moans Pierced Silence During Wait, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT GAZETTE, January 26, 1992, at 1B (Exhibit 34); Ron Fournier, 13 Outsiders View Death of Rector, Witnesses Listen, Wait Beyond Curtain, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT GAZETTE, January 26, 1992, at 4B (Exhibit 45); Exhibit 35 at ¶¶ 8, (Declaration of John Jewell). Witnesses also heard the sound of skin slapping skin as ADC personnel apparently tried to raise a vein, prompting one witness to say ‘[t]hey’re going to beat him to death.’” Ron Fournier, 13 Outsiders View Death of Rector, Witnesses Listen, Wait Beyond Curtain, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT GAZETTE, January 26, 1992, at 4B (Exhibit 45.)
Even once the IV line was secured and the curtains opened, the ordeal for Mr. Rector was not over. The flow of lethal chemicals began at 9:50pm, Exhibit 36 (Medical Examiner’s Consultation and Investigation Form - Ricky Ray Rector), and for two minutes Mr. Rector looked to witnesses as though he was nodding off to sleep. However, one observer noted that Mr. Rector said “‘I’m getting dizzy,’” two minutes after the execution began. Joe Farmer, Rector, 40, Executed for Officer’s Slaying, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT GAZETTE, January 25, 1992, at 9A. (Exhibit 37.) Then at 9:55pm, “Rector’s lips moved rapidly - as if he was drawing shallow breaths. His lips stopped moving a minute later.” Ron Fournier, 13 Outsiders View
23

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 24 of 31
Death of Rector, Witnesses Listen, Wait Beyond Curtain, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT GAZETTE, January 26, 1992, at 4B (Exhibit 45). This again suggests an attempt to fight against the effects of the pancuronium bromide. Mr. Rector still was not pronounced dead; at 10:06pm a witness noted that a heart monitor at the head of the gurney appeared to be flat-lining, only to then see another “jump” and then “another flutter.” Id. Death was finally pronounced at 10:09pm.
On May 7, 1992, 25 year old Steven Douglas Hill was executed. Exhibit 38 (Declaration of Charles L. Carpenter, Jr.); Exhibits 39, 40 (Post-mortem Photographs of Steven Hill). His execution began at 9:02pm. Exhibit 41 (Medical Examiner’s Consultation and Investigation Form - Steven Douglas Hill). His eyes closed one minute later, but shortly afterwards he had what witnesses described as “a ‘seizure,’ arching his back with his cheeks popping out.” Andy Gotlieb and Linda Satter, Hill Dies by Injection for ‘84 Police Killing, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT GAZETTE, May 8, 1992, at 17A (Exhibit 42.) He was visibly “gasping for air,” and even though he was strapped down to the gurney “his chest was heaving against the wide belt that covered his chest.” Exhibit 38 at ¶ 8 (Declaration of Charles L. Carpenter, Jr.). The seizure ended at 9:04pm and Mr. Hill was pronounced dead at 9:10pm.
Christina Riggs, the first woman to be put to death in Arkansas in over 150 years, was executed on May 2, 2000. The procedure was delayed for 18 minutes while ADC personnel struggled in vain to insert the IV line into her elbows. Exhibit 46 (Medical Examiner’s Consultation and Investigation Form - Christina Riggs). When they could not do so, they asked Ms. Riggs if they could insert the catheters into her wrists, and she consented. Exhibits 47, 48 (Post-mortem Photographs of Christina Riggs). The execution then proceeded. However, a minute after the drugs had purportedly begun to flow into her body, Ms. Riggs was still vocalizing. Witnesses heard her say “I love you, my babies.” Cathy Frye, Riggs, Mother who Killed her 2 Children, Put to Death by State, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT GAZETTE, May 3, 2000, at 1B (Exhibit 49).
24

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 25 of 31
These accounts of Arkansas executions are “extremely troubling,” because they indicate “that there were problems associated with the administration of the chemicals that may have resulted in the prisoners being conscious during portions of the executions.” Beardslee v. Woodford, 395 F.3d 1064, 1075 (9th Cir. 2005). They are also part of a growing body of evidence that suggests that identical problems are recurring over and over again in jurisdictions throughout the country that utilize similar lethal injection protocols. See, e.g., Cooey v. Taft, 2006 WL 1207982 * 5 (“Plaintiff has demonstrated a stronger likelihood of success on the merits than the plaintiffs who preceded him, given the growing body of evidence calling Ohio’s lethal injection protocol increasingly into question. This Court cannot and will not turn a blind eye to the evidence presented in the cases of Brown v. Beck in North Carolina and Morales v. Hickman in California”).
Recently, the execution of Joseph Lewis Clark by the State of Ohio demonstrated graphically and horrifically how an execution that appeared completely normal and routine at the outset can rapidly go horribly wrong. See Adam Liptak, Trouble Finding Inmate’s Vein Slows Lethal Injection in Ohio, NEW YORK TIMES, May 3, 2006 (Exhibit 43.) After searching for 22 minutes, execution personnel finally found a vein that they thought was suitable for inserting the IV catheter. Id. However, three or four minutes after the flow of lethal drugs was started, Mr. Clark literally raised his head up off the gurney and informed his executioners that “[i]t’s not working.” Id. The vein had apparently collapsed; the execution team closed the curtain to the witness room and once again began searching for a usable site for the IV, a process that took another 30 minutes. Id. Mr. Clark was not pronounced dead until 11:26am, almost an hour and a half after the ordeal began. Id.
c. The Serious Risks Engendered by ADC’s Lethal Injection Protocol are Unnecessary and Unconstitutional
Administrative Directive 96-06 both creates an unacceptable and unnecessary quantum of
25

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 26 of 31
risk that the inmate will not be adequately anesthetized and therefore will suffer excruciating pain during his execution, and also fails utterly to account for these obvious contingencies and instruct personnel on how to react to or prevent them. In this respect, the lethal injection protocol is starkly different from the judicial hanging protocol that the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld in Campbell v. Wood, 18 F.3d 662, 683 (9th Cir. 1994). Analogous to the risk that an inmate will be conscious and in excruciating pain during the lethal injection process, the State of Washington's judicial hanging procedure carried the risk that an inmate would die of asphyxiation, which is slow and painful, or decapitation, which mutilates the inmate's body, rather than dying within seconds as intended. See id. at 683.
Unlike the ADC's lethal injection protocol, however, Washington's protocol carefully acknowledged the risks that it engendered and provided detailed procedures specifically designed to minimize them. Thus, as the court noted, Washington's protocol reflected medical opinions as to the manner in which different methods of hanging would kill inmates and which modes of causing death were the most humane. Id. In order to avoid death by asphyxiation or decapitation, the protocol included detailed instructions on numerous factors that could affect the manner of death, including the diameter of the rope; the method of tying the knot; treating the rope with wax and boiling it to reduce elasticity; and the length of the drop in relation to body weight and the manner in which that length should be calculated. Id. at 683-85. All of these instructions were the result of careful consideration of the available scientific and medical evidence. In light of the Washington protocol's ample provision for the risks of an inhumane death, the Ninth Circuit concluded that the risk of a botched execution was "slight," and had been "minimized as much as possible." Id. at 687 & n.17.
In contrast to Washington's protocol, it is impossible to detect in the version of Administrative Directive 96-06 currently available any attempt on the ADC's part to account for the problems that can and do arise during an execution by lethal injection. This failure is
26

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 27 of 31
particularly egregious in light of the fact that simply having a qualified person verify, visually and tactically, that the inmate is indeed anesthetized following the administration of the sodium pentothal, would go a long way towards mitigating the risk of unnecessary pain. See Exhibit 7 at ¶ 32 (Declaration of Mark Heath M.D.) Moreover, the necessity for such monitoring may be obviated by the selection of alternative, equally effective anesthetic agents and by the use of one of the drugs capable of causing cardiac arrest that does not cause excruciating pain. Id. at 13. Yet it does not appear that the ADC has even considered these or any other means of lessening the gratuitous dangers created by its protocol. This egregious failure renders the significant risk of error truly unnecessary and unconstitutional. Cf. Campbell, 18 F.3d at 687 & n.17.
C. MR. DAVIS WILL SUFFER IRREPARABLE HARM IF A PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION IS NOT GRANTED
If the State is not enjoined from executing him in accordance with Administrative Directive 96-06, Mr. Davis will likely suffer irreparable harm. Being forced to endure excruciating pain during the execution process clearly constitutes irreparable harm. See Jolly v. Coughlin, 76 F.3d 468, 482 (2d Cir. 1996)(holding that continued pain and suffering resulting from deliberate medical indifference is irreparable harm). As is clear from the foregoing, there is ample evidence that Defendants’ proposed method of execution carries a significant and unacceptable risk that Mr. Davis will indeed suffer that harm. The threat of harm is both “real and immediate,” and thus the situation is one that is “ripe for injunctive relief.” See Goff v. Harper, 60 F.3d 518, 521 (8th Cir. 1995). Moreover, Mr. Davis will have no retrospective remedy for the constitutional violation, as he will no longer be alive.
D. THE BALANCE OF HARMS STRONGLY FAVORS MR. DAVIS In contrast, the harm to the State that will result from the entry of a preliminary injunction is slight. The State undoubtedly has a strong interest in the prompt execution of its judgments. The delay resulting from granting the temporary relief sought herein, however, will have little
27

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 28 of 31
adverse effect upon that interest. See Gomez v. US. Dist. Ct. for Northern Dist. of Ca/., 966 F.2d 460,462 (9th Cir. 1992) (Noonan, J., dissenting from grant of writ of mandate) (“The state will get its man in the end. In contrast, if persons are put to death in a manner that is determined to be cruel, they suffer injury that can never be undone, and the Constitution suffers an injury that can never be repaired.”). The balance of harms tips sharply in favor of entering a preliminary injunction.
E. GRANTING TEMPORARY RELIEF IS IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST Whether the State is executing its prisoners in a way that subjects them to an excruciatingly painful, torturous death is clearly a matter of vital public interest. The standards of decency and humanity in a society such as ours are gravely offended by such practices, and so it is affirmatively in the public interest to address and resolve the merits of the Plaintiffs’ claims in order to identify and put an end to unnecessary procedures that pose a risk of causing gratuitous suffering. Indeed, the citizens of the State of Arkansas, through their elected representatives, have expressly acknowledged the importance of conducting executions as humanely as possible by changing the method from electrocution to lethal injection as a result of the belief that the latter reduces unnecessary suffering. See Carol Matlack, House Votes Injection Bill, ARKANSAS GAZETTE, February 22, 1983, at 1A, 3A (noting that bill resulted from legislative staff study that found that lethal injection is the most humane method of execution) (Exhibit 18); John Brummett, Clark to Propose Bill on Selection of PSC, Fights Direct Election, ARKANSAS GAZETTE, January 6, 1983, at 10A (reporting that State Attorney General Steve Clark supported legislation that would make lethal injection the method of execution because he had read gruesome accounts of electrocutions and “[d]ying is dying, but I think you deserve to die with dignity”) (Exhibit 44). There is now compelling evidence that Arkansas’ lethal injection protocol creates a significant and unacceptable risk of, and on multiple occasions has actually resulted in, the
28

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 29 of 31
infliction of unnecessary pain. As noted above, the claim does not become ripe for resolution until an execution is imminent but, if a preliminary injunction is not granted, the execution will necessarily take place before the issues can be adjudicated. In light of the importance of the questions involved, it is clearly in the public interest that temporary relief be granted in the instant case to solve this dilemma and permit a definitive determination of the merits to be made. “[T]he public interest only is served by enforcing constitutional rights and by the prompt and accurate resolution of disputes concerning those constitutional rights. By comparison, the public interest has never been and could never be served by rushing to judgment at the expense of a condemned inmate’s constitutional rights.” Cooey v. Taft, 2006 WL 1207982 at *6 (S.D.Ohio)
F. MR. DAVIS ENGAGED IN NO UNDUE DELAY IN BRINGING THIS ACTION
Mr. Davis diligently prosecuted his constitutional claims as soon as they became ripe for review. The fact that the State of Arkansas chose to schedule his execution while the lawsuit and his Motion to Intervene were still pending, and before the Court has had the opportunity to adjudicate his claims on the merits, in no way detracts from the propriety of according him temporary relief in order to facilitate that adjudication. A challenge to a specific execution procedure becomes ripe for adjudication only when it is clear that the challenger will in fact be subjected to that particular procedure, i.e. “when the execution becomes imminent and the plaintiff knows or has reason to know of the facts giving rise to his specific challenges.” Cooey v. Taft, 2006 WL 1207982 at *3. These criteria are met when all state and federal legal challenges to the conviction and sentence have been exhausted and certiorari has been denied by the United States Supreme Court. Id.
Accordingly, Mr. Davis moved to join the instant action on May 4, 2006, just 17 days after the United States Supreme Court denied his application to file a certiorari petition, only 3
29

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 30 of 31
days after Mr. Nooner filed the Complaint and even before his execution date was scheduled. Far from an 11th hour attempt to manipulate and abuse the system, then, the instant action is a good-faith effort to move as promptly and expeditiously as possible to protect Mr. Davis’s constitutional rights. Accordingly, the entry of the requested preliminary injunction is appropriate under Nelson v. Campbell, 541 U.S. 637 (2004), and Hill v. McDonough, 547 U.S.
(2006). IV. CONCLUSION
The purpose of this lawsuit is not to prevent the State from executing Mr. Davis. It is to prevent it from executing him in a manner that subjects him to excruciating pain and torture that is gratuitous and unnecessary and in violation of the Constitution. To avoid the risk that his execution will be performed in such a manner, Mr. Davis is entitled to relief under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. In order to allow him an opportunity to prove that entitlement, and to obtain an adjudication of the merits of his claims, Mr. Davis respectfully requests that the Court issue a preliminary injunction preventing Defendants from executing him by means of lethal injection under the protocol currently in effect in the State of Arkansas.
Respectfully Submitted,
By: /s/ Alvin Schay ALVIN SCHAY Ark. Bar No. 75176 902 West 2nd Street Little Rock, Arkansas 72201 (501) 376 7000 (501) 376 9612 aschay@msn.com Deborah Sallings Ark. Bar No. 80127 Cauley, Bowman, Carney & Williams, PLLC P.O. Box 25438
30

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 21-1 Filed 06/12/2006 Page 31 of 31 Little Rock, Arkansas 72221-5438 (501) 312 8500 (501) 312 8505 debsal@arbs.net Counsel for Don William Davis
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE The undersigned hereby certifies that on this 12th day of June, 2006, the foregoing Application for Preliminary Injunction was filed using this Court’s EF/CMS electronic filing system and thereby automatically delivered electronically to Assistant Attorney General Mark Hagemeier, Catlett-Prien Tower Bldg., 323 Center Street, Suite 200, Little Rock, AR 722012610.
/s/ Alvin Schay ALVIN SCHAY
31

