Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 65 Filed 07/09/07 Page 1 of 13

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
________________

No. 06-2748 ________________

*

Terrick Terrell Nooner,

*

*

Appellee,

*

*

Don William Davis,

*

*

Intervenor-Appellee

*

*

v.

*

*

Larry Norris, in his official capacity *

as Director, Arkansas Departm ent

*

of Correction; Gaylon Lay, in his

*

official capacity as Warden,

*

Arkansas Department of

*

Correction, Cummins Unit; Wendy *

Kelly, in her official capacity as

*

Deputy Director of Health and

*

Correctional Programs, Arkansas

*

Department of Correction; John

*

Byus, in his of ficial capacity as

*

Administrator, Correctional

*

Medical Services, Arkansas

*

Department of Correction; DOES,

*

1-50, unknown executioners, in

*

their official capacities as

*

employees and/or agents of the

*

Arkansas Department of

*

Correction,

*

*

Appellants.

*

Appeal from the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas.

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 65 Filed 07/09/07 Page 2 of 13
________________
Submitted: March 15, 2007 Filed: July 9, 2007
________________
Before COLLOTON, HANSEN, and GRUENDER, Circuit Judges. ________________
HANSEN, Circuit Judge.
The district court granted Don WilliamDavis a preliminary injunction staying his execution to perm it him to litigate the constitutionality of Arkansas' s lethal injection protocol in a suit brought pursuant o 42 U.S.C. § 1983. In this interlocutory appeal, see 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(1), theAppellants (collectively, "the State") contend that the district court abused its discretion in granting the preliminary injunction.1 We agree, and accordingly we reverse the judgm ent of the d istrict court, dissolve the preliminary injunction it imposed, and vacate the stay of execution it entered.
I.
In 1993, the Supreme Court of Arkansas affirmed Mr. Davis's conviction for capital murder and his sentence of deat h by lethal injection, Davis v. State , 863 S.W.2d 259 (Ark. 1993), cert. denied, 511 U.S. 1026 (1994), and in 2001, affirmed the denial of his petition for postconviction relief, Davis v. State, 44 S.W.3d 726 (Ark. 2001). In 2005, we affirmed the denial of his petition for a writ of habeas corpus, filed pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2254, seeDavis v. Norris, 423 F.3d 868 (8th Cir. 2005), and the Supreme Court rejected his untimely petition for certiorari on April 17, 2006.
1Terrick Nooner is nam ed as an appellee in the caption of this interlocutory appeal, but the preliminary injunction and the stay entered by the district court affect only Mr. Davis, and accordingly, our opinion does not address Mr. Nooner.
-2-

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 65 Filed 07/09/07 Page 3 of 13
On May 4, 2006, Mr. Davis filed a m otion to intervene as a party plaintiff in this § 1983 action, which Terrick Nooner originally filed on May 1, 2006. The lawsuit challenges Arkansas's three-chemical lethal injection protocol, asserting that the State's protocol creates a significant risk of inflicting severe pain in the administration of the death sentence, and that the State's use of this protocol demonstrates deliberate indiff erence to the plaintiffs' serious medical needs. Specifically, the complaint alleges that the State's protocol presents a risk of error in administering the drugs that could result in inadequate anesthetization, creating a substantial risk that the first in jection (two grams of sodium thiopental) will fail to render him unconscious, leaving himparalyzed by the second chemical (pancuronium bromide), and suffering severe pain by the subsequent administration of the third chemical (potassium chloride). Additiona lly, the com plaint references four prior executions alleged to have been "botched."
The district court granted Mr. Davi s's motion to intervene on May 26, 2006. Before that ruling was filed, however, the governor had set an execution date of July 5, 2006, for Mr. Davis. Mr. Davis then sought a preliminary injunction to stay his impending execution by means of the current protocol. The State resisted, arguing that the claim was not likely to succeed on the merits and that the public interest and principles of equity, including unjustified delay in bringni g the claim, weighed heavily against the grant of an injunction. The di strict court rejected these arguments and granted the preliminary injunction on June 26, 2006, staying Mr. Davis's execution. The State filed this appeal.2
2On June 30, 2006, the State filed its notice of appeal and moved this court to summarily vacate the district court's order granting a preliminary injunction staying the execution. Before we could rule on the matter, the State also applied to the Supreme Court to vacate the stay before the originally set execution date, but the Court declined to vacate the stay in an order dated July5, 2006. On July 13, 2006, we entered an administrative order denying the motion to vacate pending before this court, and this appeal proceeded.
-3-

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 65 Filed 07/09/07 Page 4 of 13
II.
"We generally review a district court's decision to stay execution for an abuse of discretion." Roberts v. Norris, 415 F.3d 816, 819 (8th Cri. 2005) (citing Bowersox v. Williams, 517 U.S. 345, 346 (1996)). "A district court abuses its discretion when it applies an incorrect legalstandard." Lauer v. Barnhart, 321 F.3d 762, 764 (8th Cir. 2003). After carefully considering the record and the standards used by the district court, we conclude that the district co urt abused its discretion in granting the preliminary injunction and stay of execution. See Taylor Corp. v. Four Seasons Greetings, LLC, 403 F.3d 958, 967 (8th Cir. 2005) ("An abuse of discretion occurs when the district court bases its decision on an erroneous application of the law or a clearly erroneous finding of fact.").
A stay of execution is anequitable remedy, and an inmate challenging a state's lethal injection protocol through a § 1983 action is not entitled to a stay of execution as a matter of course. Hill v. McDonough, 126 S. Ct. 2096, 2104 (2006); Nelson v. Campbell, 541 U.S. 637, 649 (2004). The Supreme Court reemphasized in Hill that "inmates seeking time to challenge the ma nner in which the State plans to execute them must satisfy all of the requirem ents for a stay, including a showing of a significant possibility of success on themerits." 126 S. Ct. at 2104; seealso Barefoot v. Estelle, 463 U.S. 880, 895 (1983) (requiring a "significant possibility" of success and "a likelihood that irreparable harm will result" absent a stay). The Court also noted in Hill that "equity must be sensitive to the State's strong interest in enforcing its criminal judgments without undue interference from the federal courts." 126 S. Ct. at 2104. Fina lly, in this c ontext, a court "must also apply 'a strong equita ble presumption against the grant of a stay where a claim could have been brought at such a time as to allow consideration of the merits without requiring entry of a stay.'" Id. (quoting Nelson, 541 U.S. at 650). In other words, "before granting a stay, a district court must consider not only the likelihood of success on the merits and the relative harms to the parties, but also the extento which the inmate has delayed unnecessarily
-4-

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 65 Filed 07/09/07 Page 5 of 13
in bringing the claim ," which counsels ag ainst the entry of an equitable rem edy. Nelson, 541 U.S. at 649-50.
The district court rejected the State'sassertion of unnecessary delay, finding no delay at all and therefore not applying the presum ption against the grant of a stay, which arises when the claim could have been brought in time to consider the merits without requiring a stay. The district court found it was sufficient that Mr. Davis had moved to join this suit "before the State set his execution date and sh ortly after he exhausted all means for cha llenging his conviction." (Appe llants' Add. at 5.) We conclude that this is not the correct standard for determining delay in this context.
Once a state inmate's sentence of death has become final on direct review in the state's courts,3 there is no im pediment to filing a § 1983 action challenging the constitutionality of a state's lethal injection protocol as long as lethal injection is the established method of execution, the protocol is known, and no state administrative remedies are available. See Gomez v. U. S. Dist. Court for the N. Dist. of Calif., 503 U.S. 653, 653-54 (1992) (criticizing a n inmate for bringing a § 1983 m ethod of execution claim (challenging lethal gas) shortly before his execution date when the claim was not raised earlier but "could have been brought more than a decade ago"); see also Jones v. Allen , 485 F.3d 635, 640 (11th Cir.) (finding that there was no reason for waiting until 2006 to challenge lethal injection where the inm ate's conviction became final on direct review in 1988, and the legislature adopted lethal injection in 2002 while the inmate's habeas petition was pending), cert. denied, 127 S. Ct. 2160 (2007); Cooey v. Strickland , 479 F.3d 412, 421-22 (6th Cir. 2007) (finding that because a § 1983 challenge to a lethal injection protocol must accrue at
3We note that direct review includes cer tiorari review by the United States Supreme Court. See Lawrence v. Florida, 127 S. Ct. 1079, 1083 (2007) (explaining that "'direct review' has long included review by this Court"); Barefoot, 463 U.S. at 887 (the process of direct review includesthe right to petition the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari when a federal question is involved).
-5-

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 65 Filed 07/09/07 Page 6 of 13
some point before the time when the lethal injection protocol is actually imposed, "it stands to reason that the next most appropriate accrual date [is] upon conclusion of direct review in the state court or the expriation of time for seeking such review," and noting that the accrual date must be adjusted if lethal injection was not adopted until some later date); Smith v. Johnson, 440 F.3d 262, 263 (5th Cir. 2006) (noting the Fifth Circuit holds that a method of execution challenge "'may be filed any time after the plaintiff's conviction has become final on direct review'") (quoting Neville v. Johnson, 440 F.3d 221 (5th C ir. 2006)). But see Nelson, 541 U.S. at 650 (noting that other limitations may apply to an inmate' s ability to bring a § 1983 claim , such as limitations imposed by the Prison Litigati on Reform Act of 1995, "requir[ing] that inmates exhaust available state adm inistrative remedies before bringing a § 1983 action challenging the conditions of their confinement"). For purposes of this case, the State acknowledged during oral argument that an Arkansas inmate can challenge the lethal injection protocol immediately after direct review.
"[A] death sentence cannot begin to be craried out by the State while substantial legal issues [concerning the conviction or sentence] remain outstanding." Barefoot, 463 U.S. at 888. Upon completion of collateral review, however, the State is free to set an execution date, and there is a strong likelihood that any challenge to the lethal injection protocol brought thereafter will be interrupted by the establishm ent of an execution date. See Calderon v. Thom pson, 523 U.S. 538, 556 (1998) ("A State' s interests in finality are compelling when a federal court of appeals issues a mandate denying federal habeas relief."); Jones, 485 F.3d at 639-40 & n.2 (noting that "[a]s a matter of common sense, completion of collateral review eliminates the last possible obstacle to execution," making it likely that an execution date will "be set promptly upon completion of collateral review"). At that point, there can be no doubt that execution is imminent, and this imminency weighs against the grant of a stay where the inmate has delayed unjustif iably in bringing a challenge to the lethal injection protocol. See Cooey, 479 F.3d at 419 (stating that waiting until "the point of imminency plus exhaustion of federal collateral remedies adds a significant period of
-6-

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 65 Filed 07/09/07 Page 7 of 13
delay . . . and disrupts the fni al yet vital balance betweenstate and federal relations"). The Supreme Court has clearly set forth "a strong equitable presumption against the grant of a stay where a clai m could have been brought at such a tim e as to allow consideration of the merits without requiring entry of a stay." Nelson, 541 U.S. at 650; see Jones, 485 F.3d at 639-40 n.2 ("Waiting tofile suit until the Supreme Court has denied certiorari review of an inmate's federal habeas petition . . . is simply too late to avoid the inevitable need for a stay of execution.").
The proper inquiry, therefore, "is whether [Mr. Davis] could have brought his claim 'at such a time as to allow consideration of the merits without requiring entry of a stay.'" Jones, 485 F.3d at 641 (quoting Nelson , 541 U.S. at 650.) The district court did not give proper consideration to this inquiry. Our review of the record reveals that direct review of Mr. Davi s's conviction and sentence was completed in 1994, well over a decade before he challenged the lethal injection protocol. Lethal injection has been the primary method of execution in Arkansas since 1983, and the written protocol document challenged here has been in existence since 1996, with no allegation that the protocol has been altered at any time. See White v. Johnson, 429 F.3d 572, 574 (5th C ir. 2005) (c oncluding that a § 1983 c hallenge to the lethal injection procedure brought after waiting six years on death row was dilatory when the same procedure had been in place the entire time). The complaint refers to four prior allegedly "botched" executions to demonstrate the State's knowledge of failures in the protocol, but three of these had already occurred before the conclusion of Mr. Davis's direct review in 1994. The otheroccurred in May of 2000, approximately six years before Mr. Davis attempted to bring this claim. Mr. Davis at no time attempted to raise this claim during the tim e his state postconviction or federal habeas proceedings were pending, and he offe rs no justification for waiting until 2006 to challenge the protocol. See Neville, 440 F.3d at 223 (finding it im proper to grant equitable relief where no excuse was offered for the delay). Mr. Davis's delay gives rise to the equitable presum ption against a stay in this case, and he has offered no basis for overcomi ng that strong presum ption. See Gomez, 503 U.S. at 653-54
-7-

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 65 Filed 07/09/07 Page 8 of 13
(vacating a stay of execution due to "abus ive delay" for which there was "no good reason," and refusing to consider a challengeto a method of execution which, at least according to the dissent, had considerable merit); Smith, 440 F.3d at 263 (affirming the dismissal of a § 1983 complaint challenging lethal injection and denying a motion for stay where the inmate failed to provide a reasonable justification for not filing the claim until nine years after his direct appeal had been final); White, 429 F.3d at 574 (not deciding whether inmate had stated a claim because "'even if he does, he is not entitled to the equitable relief he seeks' due to his dilatory filing" (quoting Harris v. Johnson, 376 F.3d 414, 417 (5th Cir. 2004)).
Mr. Davis argues that his case is controlled by this court's recent opinion in Taylor v. Crawford, 445 F.3d 1095 (8th Cir. 2006), because Taylor was allowed to proceed with the merits of his claim where he brought suit after completing habeas review and before an execution date had been set. Mr.Davis, however, overlooks the fact that the issue of unjustified delay by the inmate was not raised or litigated in Taylor. While we noted in Taylor that the inmate had filed suit over six m onths before the death warrant was issued, id. at 1096-97, this reference served only to emphasize the district court's failure to move the case to a hearing. A prompt hearing on the merits in that case could have resolved the issue before an execution date was set, eliminating the need for a stay. Anydelay on Mr. Taylor's part was never raised. Consequently, the Taylor opinion does not inform our decision as to Mr. Davis' s unjustified delay in bringing his claim.
Nor do we believe that the Supreme Court's recent decision in Panetti v. Quarterman, No. 06-6407, 2007 WL 1836653 (June 28, 2007), is applicable to Mr. Davis's case. Panetti deals with mental competence to be executed, a condition of the mind which may not manifest itself until solate a time that a stay becomes necessary in order to evaluate properlythe asserted mental deficiency. That cannot be said about an execution protocol which, as we ha ve pointed out, has been long known and unchanged in its imp lementation for years, thereby permitting an evaluation of its
-8-

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 65 Filed 07/09/07 Page 9 of 13
constitutionality without the necessity of the issuance, in effect, of an eleventh hour stay.
III. Because the district court failed to applythe correct legal standard, we reverse the district court's grant of a prelimin ary injunction, and we vacate the stay of execution it issued in this case.
______________________________
-9-

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 65 Filed 07/09/07 Page 10 of 13

Michael E. Gans Clerk of Court

United States Court of Appeals
For The Eighth Circuit
Thomas F. Eagleton U.S. Courthouse 111 South 10th Street, Room 24.329
St. Louis, Missouri 63102

VOICE (314) 244-2400 FAX (314) 244-2780
www.ca8.uscourts.gov

July

09, 2007

Ms. Kelly Hill ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 323 Center Street 200 Catlett-Prien Building Little Rock, AR 72201-2610

RE: 06-2748 Terrick T. Nooner v. Larry Norris, et al

Dear Counsel:

The court has issued an opinion in this case. Judgment has been entered in accordance with the opinion. The opinion will be released to the public at 10:00a.m. today. Please hold the opinion in confidence until that time.

Please review Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Eighth Circuit Rules on postsubmission procedure to ensure that any contemplated filing is timely and in compliance with the rules. Note particularly that petitions for rehearing and petitions for rehearing en banc must be received in the clerk's office within 14 days of the date of the entry of judgment. Counsel-filed petitions must be filed electronically in CM/ECF. Paper copies are not required. No grace period for mailing is allowed, and the date of the postmark is irrelevant for pro-se-filed petitons. Any petition for rehearing or petition for rehearing en banc which is not received within the 14 day period for filing permitted by FRAP 40 may be denied as untimely.

Clerk

Michael E. Gans of Court

paw

Enclosure(s)

cc: Ms. Julie Brain Mr. Don William Davis Mr. Jim McCormack Mr. Terrick Terrell Nooner Ms. Deborah Ruth Sallings Mr. E. Alvin Schay Mr. Joseph Vincent Svoboda

District Court/Agency Case Number(s): 5:06-cv-00110-SWW

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 65 Filed 07/09/07 Page 11 of 13

8cc-cmecf-nda@ck8.uscourts. gov
07/09/2007 09:43 AM

To ared_appeals@ared.uscourts.gov cc bcc Subject Activity in Case 06-2748 Terrick T. Nooner v. Larry Norris, et
al "Signed Opinion Filed"

***NOTE TO PUBLIC ACCESS USERS*** You may view the filed documents once without charge. To avoid later charges, download a copy of each document during this first viewing.

Notice of Docket Activity

The following transaction was filed on 07/09/2007

Case Name:

Terrick T. Nooner v. Larry Norris, et al

Case Number:

06-2748

Document(s):

Document(s)

Docket Text: OPINION FILED - THE COURT: STEVEN M. COLLOTON ; DAVID R. HANSEN ; RAYMOND W. GRUENDER. David R. Hansen, Authoring Judge (PUBLISHED) [3327390] [06-2748]
The following document(s) are associated with this transaction: Document Description:Signed Opinion Filed Original Filename:062748p.pdf Electronic Document Stamp: [STAMP acecfStamp_ID=1105112566 [Date=07/09/2007] [FileNumber=3327390-0] [6a950a86593c6ad3ce3e67ae3b84f7a4c11cb5569c60fd2e5c0a603600957b2c544773e1b4dc31cf ea73a73bcc11d179e956c89afc2846ba0cbe185863fa055f]] Document Description:form(s) sent Original Filename: /opt/ACECF/live/forms/pwakefield_062748_3327390_LettersToPublishing_284.pdf Electronic Document Stamp: [STAMP acecfStamp_ID=1105112566 [Date=07/09/2007] [FileNumber=3327390-1] [9c0845d5c8330239cb5ceb93ad6b019c3fe9d62457d47c342a64557bf22ab29b7a5c9f7af8cd3d6b 364a76078620e8829cef860a2663815dfc929f0bf75d6708]] Document Description:form(s) sent Original Filename: /opt/ACECF/live/forms/pwakefield_062748_3327390_CounselOpinionLetters_285.pdf Electronic Document Stamp: [STAMP acecfStamp_ID=1105112566 [Date=07/09/2007] [FileNumber=3327390-2] [5c0a5c56088567d67e798fcd0d1804fd98edd55835efc0a01fd1d9c309021769f6cf6dd725334013 6e036996a07fd4008e991d22bfc7ac5ca9a794b9c5062bf9]]

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 65 Filed 07/09/07 Page 12 of 13
06-2748 Notice will be electronically mailed to:
Brain, Julie: julie_brain@fd.org, juliebrain1@yahoo.com, cindy_westlake@fd.org, maggie_hill@fd.org, jenniffer_horan@fd.org, scott_braden@fd.org, josh_lee@fd.org, leejoshr@yahoo.com, kim_driggers@fd.org Hill, Kelly: kelly.hill@arkansasag.gov, janice.meharg@arkansasag.gov, theresa.griffin@arkansasag.gov McCormack, Jim: ared_appeals@ared.uscourts.gov Sallings, Deborah Ruth: dsallings@cauleybowman.com, dengelby@cauleybowman.com Schay, E. Alvin: ASCHAY@msn.com Svoboda, Joseph Vincent: Joe.Svoboda@arkansasag.gov, Janice.Meharg@arkansasag.gov, Theresa.Griffin@arkansasag.gov Lois Law: FED08@loislaw.com MO Lawyers Weekly: smaniscalco@mo.lawyersweekly.com West Publishing: us08@westdcs.west.thomson.com
06-2748 Notice will be mailed to:
Brain, Julie FEDERAL PUBLIC DEFENDER'S OFFICE 1401 W. Capitol Suite 490 Little Rock, AR 72201-3325
Davis, Don William ARKANSAS DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTION Maximum Security Unit 2501 State Farm Road Tucker, AR 72168-8713
Hill, Kelly ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 323 Center Street 200 Catlett-Prien Building Little Rock, AR 72201-2610
McCormack, Jim U.S. DISTRICT COURT Eastern District of Arkansas 600 W. Capitol Avenue Room 402 Little Rock, AR 72201-0000

Case 5:06-cv-00110-SWW Document 65 Filed 07/09/07 Page 13 of 13
Nooner, Terrick Terrell ARKANSAS DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTION Varner SuperMax Unit P.O. Box 400 Grady, AR 71644-0400
Sallings, Deborah Ruth CAULEY & BOWMAN P.O. Box 25438 Little Rock, AR 72212-0000
Schay, E. Alvin 14 Skyway Drive Little Rock, AR 72207
Svoboda, Joseph Vincent ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 323 Center Street 1100 Catlett-Prien Building Little Rock, AR 72201-0000
The following information is for the use of court personnel:
DOCKET ENTRY ID: 3327390 RELIEF(S) DOCKETED:
for publication DOCKET PART(S) ADDED: 3537093, 3537094, 3537095

