4.3.1 Information Extraction Approaches. Early summarisation systems were mostly concerned with extracting relevant information from structured or unstructured medical text. The Linguistic String Project (LSP) [Sager et al. 1994 ] is an example of early medical NLP work. Its primary purpose is the transformation of clinical narratives into formal representations. MedLEE  ] is also responsible for extracting information from clinical narratives and presenting the information in structured forms through the use of a controlled vocabulary. It is used for processing various forms of notes and reports and is integrated with a clinical information system. HiTEx BIB10891556 ] is yet another system used for extracting findings such as diagnoses and family history from clinical narratives through the use of NLP techniques. TRESTLE (Text Retrieval Extraction and summarisation Technologies for Large Enterprises) BIB6976169 ] is an information extraction system that generates summarised information from pharmaceutical newsletters in one sentence through the identification of Named Entities (NEs) followed by sentence extraction based on the presence of key NEs. Drug and disease names are considered by this system to be named entities. BIB4380960 present MEDSYNDIKATE, a natural language processor that automatically extracts clinical information from reports. The contents of the texts are transferred to conceptual representations that correspond to a knowledge base, and the system incorporates domain knowledge to semantically interpret major syntactic patterns in medical documents. BIB207015066 propose the MedEx system which uses NLP to extract medication information from clinical notes with very high recall and precision. Extractive Summarisation Approaches. Most summarisation systems in this domain applied extractive summarisation approaches like the initial MiTAP system (MITRE Text and Audio Processing) BIB62660766 which was targeted towards the monitoring of infectious disease outbreaks or other biological threats. MiTAP monitors various sources of information such as online news, television news, and newswire feeds. and captures information which are filtered and processed to identify sentences, paragraphs, and POS tags. The final summary is generated by WebSumm BIB195600496 as extracted sentences from the processed text. BIB12723780 propose a single-document, extractive summarisation approach that combines BioChain ], which identifies relevant sentences using concept-chaining (similar to lexical chaining but applied to UMLS concepts), and the FreqDist system ], which uses a frequency distribution model to identify relevant sentences. This hybrid approach, called ChainFreq, sequentially employs the BioChain method to identify candidate sentences that contain relevant concepts, and then the FreqDist method, which generates a set of summary sentences from the chosen sentences. Other extractive approaches have been proposed with various intents: BIB2100529 presents an approach for automated sentence Non-extractive Approaches. MUSI is an early system that applies semantic information thoroughly  (MUltilingual summarisation for the Internet). It follows an approach similar to the ones already mentioned for sentence extraction but also has the capability of producing semantic representations of the extracted sentences to produce an abstractive summary. Other than the MUSI system, early research in this area did not consider abstractive summarisation. Recently, however, a number of abstractive summarisation systems have been proposed (e.g., PERSIVAL BIB15641201 , MedQA BIB14578129 ], EpoCare BIB13233387 BIB16033035 . We discuss some of these approaches in more detail in the following subsections.