A number of factors make the medical domain a complex and interesting one for text processing. They include: large volume of data (e.g., about 24 million articles in MEDLINE alone); highly complex domain-specific terminologies (e.g., drug names and disease names); domain-specific linguistic and ontological resources (such as UMLS); and software tools and methods for identifying semantic concepts and relationships (such as MetaMap BIB14187105 . The integration of technology with medical practice was initiated through the use of Clinical Decision Support (CDS) systems. Such systems help practitioners "make clinical decisions, deal with medical data or with the knowledge of medicine necessary to interpret such data"  ]. Early CDS systems consisted mostly of applications that facilitated diagnosis, treatment BIB27947621 BIB3005462 and the management of patients (e.g., through computerised guidelines and alerts) BIB11042889 . However, the capabilities of such applications were quite limited, primarily because they did not have access to raw medical data BIB2319072 . Since a lot of medical data is textual, the need to integrate NLP with CDS systems became more noticeable as the volume of medical data increased. This requirement introduced new challenges as well, such as faster processing ], which the latest research in large-scale distributed processing has successfully addressed. A detailed discussion of CDS systems is outside the scope of this paper and in the following subsections, we focus instead on a subset of CDS systems that attempt to provide answers to clinical queries by summarising the information contained in medical texts. Such systems consist of information extraction, summarisation, and QA components, and we do not distinguish between these three types. Identifying and presenting evidence in a condensed manner is essentially a task of summarisation. Hence we refer to these systems/components as summarisation systems. For QA systems, we primarily discuss their summarisation components. For the interested reader, BIB2319072 provide a review of early NLP-based CDS approaches and a recent and detailed analysis of CDS systems and NLP for the medical domain is provided by [DemnerFushman et al. 2009 ]. Readers unfamiliar with QA may refer to BIB16534280 for an overview of QA techniques in restricted domains and BIB13578700 ] for a review of QA approaches in the biomedical domain.