Ely et al. [2002] conducted a well known research to identify and explain the obstacles practitioners face when they attempt to answer clinical questions using evidence. The study revealed fifty-nine obstacles which were divided into the following five broad categories (i) recognising that there is a void in the knowledge of a practitioner on a specific topic, (ii) formulating a clinical query that accurately and comprehensively encapsulates the information needs of the practitioner, (iii) performing efficient searches for the relevant information, (iv) synthesising multiple and incomplete evidences to formulate the final response, (v) and using the formulated answer to make decisions about patient care, taking into account other relevant information such as the medical history of the patient. From the fifty nine obstacles, BIB23592841 also identified a few that are considered to be critical by practising doctors, which are as follows: (1) The amount of time needed to find information is commonly seen as the most crucial obstacle in EBM practice. Most busy doctors lack the time or skills to track down and evaluate evidence, and when searching for evidence, practicing doctors do not have time to search multiple resources. Literature search and appraisal may take hours and even days. According to  , it takes more than 30 minutes on average for a practitioner to search for an answer. But usually practitioners spend about 2 minutes BIB18659325 . Hence, many questions go unanswered. BIB1946105 classify this problem as a 'resource-related' problem and state that physicians want rapid access to concise answers that are easy to find and tell them what to do in specific terms. (2) It is often difficult to structure a question that includes all the important information and is not vague. Recent research in medical information retrieval has focused on query formulation and other aspects of information retrieval to aid practitioners BIB8057998  . (3) It is difficult to select an optimal strategy to search for information as the medical literature is unwieldy, disorganised and biased  ], and although electronic databases facilitate searching, the procedure requires skill and expertise. Even for an experienced librarian, the search to find a comprehensive set of documents related to a clinical query may take hours. Other difficulties related to information seeking include the presence of large numbers of irrelevant material in search results, and the difficulty in finding correct search terms  ]. (4) An identified resource may not cover the specific topic, and often practitioners may not have timely access to the necessary resources required to answer a question BIB25962514 . (5) It is often difficult to tell when all the relevant evidence associated with a topic has been found. The number of relevant documents can vary significantly between topics, and, therefore, physicians are often left unsure as to when they should stop searching BIB23592841 BIB25872630 . (6) The synthesis of information-once all the relevant information has been found, it is a daunting task to synthesise the information from different sources. Studies carried out have shown that practitioners frequently mention difficulties with generalising research findings and applying evidence to individual patient care BIB25962514 . The reasons behind this include the incapability of any of the sources to completely answer the clinical question, the selected articles not directly answering the clinical question, and different articles providing contradictory information BIB1946105 BIB23592841 .