5.4.1 ROUGE. Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE) BIB16292125 BIB964287 ] is one of the most widely used tools for automatic summary evaluation, and consists of a number of metrics that evaluate summaries based on distinct criteria. The various ROUGE measures attempt to compute similarities between system generated summaries and gold standard summaries at a lexical level. One of the metrics, for example, called ROUGE-N, is an n-gram based recall-oriented measure, and is calculated using the following formula: ROU GE − N (s) = r∈R < φ n (r), φ n (s) > r∈R < φ n (r), φ n (r) > where R = {r 1 , ..., r m } denote the group of gold-standard summaries, s denotes an automated system summary, and φ n (d) denotes a binary vector contained in a document d BIB16292125 BIB964287 . This metric, therefore, simply attempts to measure the extent to which an automatically generated summary contains the same information as the reference summary. Other ROUGE metrics apply different techniques with the same primary intent. For example, ROUGE-L attempts to find the longest 5.4.2 BLEU. BLEU  was originally designed for evaluating machine translation, and has been shown to be promising for automatic summary evaluation as well BIB40166767 . In this technique, automatically computed accumulative n-gram matching scores (NAMS) between a model unit (MU) and a system summary (S) are used as performance indicators of the system  . A number of combinations of n-grams are used to compute NAMS, and the technique is shown to have satisfactory correlation with human scores. 5.4.3 Information-theoretic Evaluation. introduce an information-theoretic approach to the automatic evaluation of summaries based on the divergence of distribution of terms between an automatic summary and model summaries. For a set of documents D, the authors assume that there exists a probabilistic distribution with parameters specified by θ R that generates reference summaries from D, and the task of summarisation is to estimate θ R . Similarly, the authors assume that every system summary is generated from a probabilistic distribution with parameters specified by θ A . The process of summary evaluation then becomes the task of estimating the distance between θ R and θ A . The authors present a number of variants of divergence measures (e.g., Jensen-Shannon divergence (JS), Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL)) for this and show that this technique is comparable to ROUGE for the evaluation of single-document summarisation, and better than ROUGE in evaluating multi-document summarisation systems. BIB12876047 and BIB16946320 present similar information theoretic evaluation approaches, which incorporate other divergence measures and also attempt to capture complex phoenomena such as synonymy. 5.4.4 ParaEval. The motivation behind this evaluation technique is the lack of semantic matching of content in automatic evaluation. The authors of this evaluation technique BIB1822304 explain that an essential part of semantic matching involves paraphrase matching and this evaluation system attempts to perform that. ParaEval applies a three-level comparison strategy. At the top level, an optimal search via dynamic programming to find multi-word to multi-word paraphrase matches between generated and reference summaries is used. In the second level, a greedy algorithm is used to find single-word paraphrase matches among non-matching fragments in the first level. Finally, literal lexical uni-gram matching is performed on the remaining text at the third level. The authors show that the quality of ParaEval's evaluations closely resembles that of ROUGE.