Techniques for automatic summary evaluation can be divided into two broad classes-extrinsic and intrinsic. Extrinsic evaluation techniques focus on the purpose of summaries. The objective is to measure the usefulness of a summary for a specific task. The single feature that plays the most important role in determining the usefulness of a summary is its content, and numerous evaluation techniques use this feature as an indication of the qualities of summaries. Recall, precision, F-score, coverage and other similar measures BIB40166767 have been frequently used in the past as simple evaluations of content relevance (e.g., BIB61451180 BIB189060  BIB13233387 BIB16033035 ). More sophisticated techniques have also been applied for extrinsic evaluation. An example is the assessment of the answerability of questions, which can be answered from original texts, from summarised texts BIB207228587 ;  ;  . These evaluation techniques have been employed in open domain QA, but have not been explored for the medical domain until 41 The system does not perform information retrieval. Intrinsic methods concentrate on the summary itself, trying to measure features such as coherence, cohesion, grammaticality, readability and other important features. Intrinsic methods for extractive summaries assess features such as discourse well-formedness, while those for non-extractive approaches must also assess sentence well-formedness. Although in some domains, such as news, intrinsic evaluation plays an important role, for a query-focused summarisation system for EBM, we believe it to be much less important. The reasons are discussed later in the section.