While discussing approaches in the previous subsection, we attempted to only provide the reader with a flavour of the various directions in which medical text summarisation has progressed. We intentionally skipped some important systems and filtered out many. In this subsection, we discuss the characteristics of a number of systems that perform summarisation of medical text. For full QA systems, we primarily focus on their summarisation components. This review not only discusses the capabilities of the systems but also presents their strengths and weaknesses from the perspective of EBM. Table I BIB14578129 answers definitional questions by producing paragraph-level answers from MEDLINE and the web. Syntactic parsing, query formulation, and query classification techniques are used to prepare queries, and an IR engine retrieves relevant documents . The answer extraction component employs document zone detection and sentence categorisation via the identification of cue phrases. Definitional sentences are identified in this fashion. Hierarchical clustering BIB3233098 ] and centroid-based summarisation techniques ] are used for text summarisation. The system's ability to answer definitional questions is evaluated against three search engines-Google, OneLook and PubMed ; Evaluations show that Google is very effective in obtaining definitions, outperforming MedQA. MedQA has opened new directions in medical text summarisation. It has shown how supervised classification can be used for intermediate steps in medical text summarisation, such as query analysis. MedQA, however, is not capable of incorporating semantic information, and the intent of the system is very different from the requirements of the EBM practitioner. The key limitation of the system is that it can only answer definitional questions, and not real life-like complex ones. 36 that uses a statistical and knowledge-based approach and is particularly targeted towards the practice of EBM. The proposed system uses PICO representations of questions as queries which are sent to PubMed to retrieve an initial set of abstracts. From the abstracts, each of the PICO elements (Problem/Population, Intervention, Comparison and Outcome) are extracted using various techniques. MetaMap is extensively used to identify UMLS terms and their categories. The population extractor uses a series of hand-crafted rules to identify occurrences of population terms in the abstracts, with preference given to terms occurring earlier in the documents. The problem extractor identifies elements that represent the UMLS semantic group 'DISORDER'. The intervention and comparison elements are identified in a similar way-by recognition of multiple UMLS semantic types (e.g., clinical drug, diagnostic procedure, etc.). In structured abstracts, more weight is given if the semantic types occur in 'title', 'aims' or 'methods' sections, while, in unstructured abstracts, more weight is given if they appear towards the beginning of the document. Using the extracted knowledge, the authors re-rank the retrieved documents using a document ranking algorithm that takes into account the knowledge elements, strength of evidence and other task specific considerations . An outcome extractor extracts outcome sentences from the retrieved documents using a "strategy based on an ensemble of classifiers (a rule-based classifier, a bag-of-words classifier, an n-gram classifier, a position classifier, an abstract length classifier and a semantic classifier)" . Each sentence is given a probability based on the classifier scores, and the top-ranked sentences are chosen. As the final output, the system simply produces the top ranked sentences from the top re-ranked documents along with the question and the strength of recommendation. Only basic clinical questions such as 'What is the best drug treatment for X?' are addressed. The authors evaluate the performance of the knowledge extractors against different baselines and also manually evaluate the final output against a baseline that only presents top sentences from unranked documents. The techniques applied by the CQA system show the importance of statistics and domain-specific knowledge for medical text summarisation. There are several limitations of the system. It relies on PICO frames for queries (instead of natural language questions), and an information synthesis technique is absent at the end to produce a single answer from related documents. Furthermore, the algorithm applied to predict the qualities of evidences does not follow an evidence-based guideline. 4.4.3 Summarisation using SemRep. BIB2456270 ,  and BIB13787765 propose an approach to abstractive summarisation that primarily relies on utilising semantic information. The summariser uses SemRep as a semantic processor to perform source interpretation and predication listing, and relies on user-specified topics. A transformation stage generalises and condenses the list of predicates generating a conceptual condensate for the input topic. The transformation is carried out in four phases: Relevance, Connectivity, Novelty, and Saliency. First, the relevance phase is responsible for identifying predications for a particular topic (e.g., treatments). The UMLS semantic network is utilised, along with a controlled schema, to identify predications. The predications, which must conform to the schema, are called the 'core predications. The Connectivity phase is a generalisation process and retrieves all predications that share arguments with core predications. The Novelty phase condenses the summaries further by removing general argument predications (e.g., Pharmaceutical Preparations), which are predications that appear higher in the UMLS metathesaurus hierarchy. Finally, the Saliency phase calculates the occurrence of uses simple frequency measures to keep the representative predicates, predications, and arguments. The final summary is produced in the form of a graph, and the approach can be applied to both single documents and multiple documents without requiring any modifications. One of the drawbacks of the system is that it does not incorporate query information. The system is evaluated BIB13787765 ] on its capability to discover drug interventions for disorders/syndromes only (other forms of interventions are not taken into account). Therefore, the application domain of the system is very limited. Furthermore, only clinical trials are used as source documents. The performance of the system is compared to a baseline that selects drug names based on the frequencies of their occurrence in source texts. A scoring mechanism called the clinical usefulness score is used. It rewards the systems for identifying beneficial drug interventions and penalises them for identifying harmful or not useful ones. To assess the usefulness of drug interventions, drug listings in Clinical Evidence (CE) articles are used as gold standards, in place of manually annotated references. The system is shown to outperform the baseline in terms of both the clinical usefulness score and mean average precision (MAP). The summarisation approach applied by the SemRep system is simple, innovative, and effective. Its performance illustrates the importance of domain-specific semantic information, and the usefulness of distributional semantics in automated summarisation for this domain. Incorporating query-focus into the summarisation procedure could technique more applicable for EBM practice. Summary information requirements must be identified from clinical questions instead of manually identified topics, and the summarisation component should be able to identify information other than drug interventions. 4.4.4 EPoCare. The EpoCare (Evidence at Point of Care) 37 project BIB189060  BIB13233387 BIB16033035 is an initiative by the University of Toronto to develop a clinical QA system. The current implementation relies heavily on automatic identification of PICO elements from both clinical questions and their corresponding answers. PICO keywords are first identified from the question and used as keywords for retrieval. The problem of identifying answers to a clinical question is divided into four sub-problems -(i) identifying roles (PICO elements) in the text, (ii) identifying the lexical boundary of each element, (iii) analysing the relationships between distinct elements and (iv) determining which combinations of roles are most likely to contain correct answers. The initial work presented by Niu and colleagues addresses simple treatment-type questions. MetaMap is used for 37 http://www.cs.toronto.edu/km/epocare/index.html. Accessed on 15th Jan, 2016.