Evidence-based medicine (EBM) promotes a form of medical practice which requires the incorporation of the current, best research evidence available on a topic by medical practitioners, combine it with their expertise, and the patients' preferences, when making medical decisions. However, the amount of available medical research literature is massive, presenting practitioners with the problem of information overload. As such, there has been increasing interest in recent times on research targeted towards the development of post-retrieval systems that can summarise information based on the needs of medical practitioners. Text summarisation is a field of research within the domain of natural language processing (NLP), and its aim is to generate summaries from large volumes of text. While research on open-domain text summarisation has seen significant progress, its application to problems involving more complex forms of natural language, such as those in the medical domain, is still very much in its infancy BIB205714398 . This can be attributed to the fact that systems attempting to summarise information in such complex domains require the incorporation of vast amounts of domain-specific knowledge, which practitioners acquire through years of experience, and integrate that knowledge with NLP techniques targeted towards summarisation of information. Thus, NLP researchers intending to develop end-to-end summarisation systems to support EBM require an in-depth understanding of the practice as well as techniques for automated summarisation. The intent of this survey is to bring together information from the distinct domains of EBM and ATS, and to provide a single resource for researchers attempting to develop automated summarisation systems addressing the needs of this practice. In this paper, we review the state-of-the-art for EBM. We first provide a detailed description of EBM, its goals, the obstacles faced by practitioners, and a brief overview of how various NLP techniques can aid the practice. In the second part of this paper, we focus on ATS. We first provide a brief review of generic summarisation techniques, and then present a discussion of the state-of-the-art in summarisation/question-answering technologies in this domain, pointing out the gaps in research that need to be filled to implement end-to-end systems. We then provide a relatively detailed discussion of summarisation approaches that have been applied to the medical domain, and analyse some recent summarisation approaches in detail. In particular, we attempt to answer the following questions: -What is EBM and what are the major obstacles hindering EBM practice? -What are the characteristics of text in the medical domain? -What tools and resources are available for text processing in the medical domain? -What is ATS and what is its relevance to EBM? -What is the current state of research in ATS, particularly for the medical domain? -How can ATS approaches for EBM be evaluated? The rest of the article is organised as follows. In Section 2 we provide a detailed overview of EBM, the technological needs of the practice, and the challenges associated with it. We also discuss the tools and resources that are currently available to EBM practitioners. We review the literature associated with ATS in Section 3 and discuss some key techniques that have been applied in the past. In Section 4, we focus our review on question answering and summarisation techniques specific to the medical domain, including current state-of-the-art in evidence-based text summarisation. In Section 5, we briefly review some evaluation techniques for ATS and discuss their applicability to EBM. We conclude the paper in Section 6, and summarise the key discoveries from our survey.