3.3.1 Early Summarisation Approaches. The earliest known work on automated summarisation dates back to 1958 when BIB15475171 proposed that the frequency of words could provide a measure of their importance in a document. In his work, he ranked words based on their frequencies and used the ranking of individual words in a sentence to calculate their significance, finally selecting the top ranked sentences as the summary. BIB21241987 used sentence position as a feature for selecting important sentences in a document (e.g., for news sentences, early sentences are more important than later sentences). BIB1177942 extended this work on summarisation and proposed a extensible model for extractive summarisation, which later on came to be known as the Edmundsonian Paradigm  . In this proposed model, the author used a weighted linear equation to combine four features to score text nuggets (e.g., sentences) for summary inclusion: where α, β, γ and δ are manually assigned weights; W is the overall weight of sentence s, C represents the score given to sentence s due to the presence of cue words (bonus words or stigma words) extracted from a corpus, K represents the score given for key words (based on word frequency), L is the score given based on sentence location features, and T is the weight assigned based on terms in the sentence that are also present in the title. Such a statistical approach to sentence selection has been very popular in the research community with Earl [1970] being the first to experiment with a variety of shallow lexical features. More recently, numerous statistical approaches using multiple words, noun phrases, main verbs, and named entities. have been proposed BIB1584325 BIB8598694 BIB14336759   ], while some research focused on utilising shallow lexical items with salient properties (e.g., subheadings) BIB11846745 BIB15232501 or via the analysis of topical content BIB10216129 . The importance of the discourse structure of a text was realised quite early in summarisation research, and this property has been heavily exploited ever since BIB796701 BIB11627017  24 , which was initiated from the Text Summarisation track of the DUC and the Question Answering track of the TREC. Since the commencement of widespread research on ATS, a branch of research has focused on the application of machine learning algorithms for text summarisation. In most of the initial research, machine learning was employed sparingly, as preliminary steps  . Early research mostly assumed feature independence and used the Naïve Bayes classifier BIB5775833 BIB5519987  with various features including those used in the Edmundsonian Paradigm. Later research introduced the use of richer feature sets and a range of machine learning algorithms. For example, BIB2010014 [2007] . While one branch of research focused on machine learning approaches, another branch progressed research on natural language analysis techniques. BIB14130036 and BIB11627017   use the Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) 25 by building RST source text trees using discourse structure information, and identifying the nuclei of the trees to build the summaries. and utilise the PALSUMM model which uses more abstract discourse trees. BIB1584325 show the use of lexical chains -sequences of related words that can span short or long distances -for single-document summarisation. For example, and BIB15641201 use a template suited to the medical domain; BIB2446679 and BIB60892460 fill up template slots from a database of news information as a first step to their algorithm for news summarisation; and BIB192339 show the use of templates to automatically generate Wikipedia articles. 3.3.3 Multi-document Summarisation. The field of multi-document summarisation was pioneered by the SUMMONS BIB2446679 BIB60892460 ] summarisation system, which employed a template-based summarisation approach. Extractive summarisation systems have been shown to work well for multiple documents particularly in the news domain, an example being the MEAD 26 system. Multi-document summarisation approaches suffer from the problems of incoherence and redundancy, and numerous approaches have been proposed to address them. One popular approach to reduce redundancy is the use of clustering. In this technique, common themes or concepts across document sets are identified and grouped or clustered together. Once the clusters are created, the summary can be generated by applying various algorithms that depend primarily on the content and compression needs. For example, some use a single sentence to represent each cluster in the final summary BIB2446679  , while some generate a composite sentence from each cluster through the use of information fusion so as to combine the most salient concepts from multiple sentences within a cluster BIB1584325 BIB7031344 BIB16188305 . Another approach that has been successfully applied to limit the selection redundant information when performing summarisation is Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR). This technique, which is specifically useful for query-focused summarisation, text segments that are deemed relevant to a query, usually via some text similarity measure, are rewarded. At the same time, redundant text segments are penalised using the same similarity measure. The two similarity measures are combined using a linear equation in an attempt to balance redundancy and relevance. MMR was initially utilised for document retrieval and is given by the following formula: where, as explained by BIB6334682 : "Q is a query; R = IR(C, Q, θ), i.e., the ranked list of documents retrieved by an IR system given a document collection C and a relevance threshold θ; S is the subset of documents in R already selected; R\S is the set difference, i.e., the set of unselected documents in R; Sim 1 is the similarity metric used in document retrieval and relevance ranking between documents and a query; and Sim 2 can be the same or a different metric." Graph-based approaches have also been applied to text summarisation BIB6025826 BIB195600496 BIB2962090 BIB16136677 , with BIB6025826 being the pioneers in this area. In their approach, the authors use nodes to represent words and edges between nodes represent relationships. The summaries generated can be topic driven, and there is no text in the summaries. Instead, the summary content is represented via as nodes and edges that represent contents and relations between them. When summarising a pair of documents, common nodes represent same words or synonyms, while difference nodes are those that are not common. Sentence selection from the graph is computed from the average activated weights of the covered words: for a sentence s, its score in terms of coverage of common nodes is given by the following formula: where c(s) = {w|w ∈ Common s}. The score for differences is calculated similarly. The sentences with higher common and difference scores are selected for the final summary. BIB2962090 presented the LexRank system for multi-document summarisation, which is a graph-based system using a connected, undirected graph to represent documents. A similar method, suitable for single-document summarisation only, was proposed by BIB577937 . Other graph based approaches have been proposed, both in the medical domain BIB12723780 BIB2456270 and outside it BIB12222596 . Similar to graph-based techniques are centroid-based summarisation techniques, first proposed by . The summarisation is done in three stages. The first stage involves grouping together news articles on the same topics (topic detection), with the goal of clustering together news stories based on the events they discuss. These groups are called clusters and the centroid for each cluster is computed. The centroid of a cluster is a pseudo-document consisting of a set of highly relevant words. The relevance of these words is determined using Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (tf×idf ) measures-those having tf×idf values above a predetermined threshold are included in the centroid. Tf and idf values are computed using the following equations: where n i,j is the occurrence frequency of the considered term t i in document d j , and k n kj is the sum of the number of occurrences of all the terms in d j ; |D| is the total number of documents the corpus contains, and |{d : t i ∈ d}| is the total count of documents where the term t i occurs. In the second stage, salient topics are identified via the use of centroids, and the overall score for each sentence is computed by combining three distinct values-centroid, positional, and overlap with the first sentence-minus a penalty for redundancy.