Despite the presence of many barriers, EBM practice has gained popularity over recent years for a number of reasons, including its promise of improving patient healthcare in the long run. As for the barriers, advances in technology are gradually eliminating them and making the process more efficient. From the problems and barriers specified earlier in this section, it can be inferred that the next boost in EBM practice will come from research in NLP. NLP offers suitable solutions to the problems faced by EBM practitioners, particularly for problems associated with information overload. Ideally, practitioners require bottom-line answers to their queries, along with estimates about the qualities of the evidences. They require fast access to information, and evidence-backed reasoning for recommendations BIB1946105 . NLP has the potential of addressing all these requirements. For example, Query Analysis can be used to understand and expand practitioners' queries through the use of domain-specific semantic information. Queries posed by practitioners are often very short with an average of 2.5 words BIB102992 , and therefore existing techniques for ontology-driven query reformulation BIB205590899 ] can be built upon to help practitioners compose and refine queries. Information Retrieval techniques tailored for the medical domain can be used to increase the recall and precision of literature searches. Strength of recommendation values can be used to classify documents to make searches more reliable. There has already been some research in this area with promising outcomes BIB14914008 BIB6324040 . Information Extraction techniques which incorporate domain knowledge (e.g., MeSH terms, UMLS) can be used to extract relevant information, based on practitioners' questions, from the retrieved documents. This is also an area that is being explored by medical informatics researchers, and knowledge-based and statistical techniques have produced promising results BIB339805 . Furthermore, some research has attempted to extract semantic information and use that information to represent the main concepts presented in documents BIB8166398 BIB2456270 BIB13787765 . Research in the area of information extraction is closely related to that of Document Summarisation. The goal of summarisation in this context is to summarise the content extracted from multiple documents and present them to the users (i.e., specific bottom-line recommendations). Summarisation of multiple documents is a well explored area (e.g., in the news domain), however its application to the medical domain is still quite limited. Successful summarisation of medical documents and effective presentation of summarised information to the user are key to the successful development of end-to-end question answering systems that can be used for EBM practice. More specifically, query-focused multi-document summarisation that incorporates medical domain knowledge is an area of research that is worth exploring and success in this area will significantly advance the practice of EBM. For the rest of this survey, we cover automated summarisation techniques and their applications to the medical domain.