If summarising for EBM is a hard task, evaluating summaries is even harder. A summarisation system for EBM should be capable of extracting evidence from medical articles and additionally assess the grade of the evidence. The evaluation should be able to determine if the evidence is correctly extracted and also if the extracted information correctly answers the practitioner's query. Therefore, the single most important aspect of the summary is its content and a strong focus on extrinsic evaluation is required. Intrinsic evaluation to assess aspects such as coherence and readability are perhaps not very important, and a stronger focus needs to be on the purpose of summaries  . For the automatic evaluation of summaries, approaches based on n-gram co-occurrence such as ROUGE are the most frequently used. Although these approaches are very robust and efficient, their main drawback is that if two summaries were produced using non-or almost non-overlapping vocabulary, yet conveying the same information, the similarity score such summaries would be assigned by purely n-gram based metrics would be too low and, hence, unrepresentative of the actual information they share. This is definitely not desirable for evaluation, particularly in the medical domain where relations such as synonymy and hyponymy play important roles. Furthermore, making relative comparisons between different summarisers is difficult using automatic evaluation approaches such as ROUGE. Thus, approaches that incorporate domain knowledge, semantic similarities, and comparisons between summarisation systems are required. Research on the evaluation of summarisers for EBM is still very much in its infancy. However, recent works in this area such as that of BIB13787765 and BIB205714398 have made useful contributions by ensuring that evaluation techniques assess the performance of the summariser in the light of its goals.