Automated text summarisers must take into account a number of factors to achieve their goals. Here we discuss some of these factors, knowledge of which is essential to understand the process of text summarisation. The factors affecting ATS can be grouped into three main categories: input, purpose and output. We primarily draw the following information from existing literature   BIB5375832  , and provide references to articles containing more detail in specific cases. 3.2.1 Input. The following factors are associated with the inputs of a summarisation system: Unit -Summarisers can take as input either one document or multiple documents. Summarising multiple documents represents a more difficult task than summarising single documents, and, additional algorithms are required to overcome problems of redundancy (different documents might present identical information which could lead to repetitions in the summary), inconsistency (the information presented in distinct documents may not be consistent), and incoherence (information extracted from separate documents may not be coherent when presented together). Language -A summarising system can be mono-lingual, multi-lingual or cross-lingual. Domain -Summarisation systems can either be domain-specific or domain-independent. Domainindependent approaches are applicable to documents from various domains without requiring any changes in the algorithm. While having the benefit of portability to different domains, domainindependent approaches fail to take advantage of knowledge and resources available to specific domains. Domain-specific systems are designed for specific domains and use all the available resources and knowledge available for the relevant domain. There has been significant research in text summarisation specific to domains such as news BIB16188305 , scientific BIB17983059 , legal BIB13538983 , and medical BIB339805  . Structure -This refers to the external structure of documents, such as headings, boxes, tables, and also more subtle exploitable structural information such as rhetorical patterns. The structure of documents can vary between domains. For example, news stories do not generally have much explicit structure other than top-level headlines  , while technical articles contain more structure which can be exploited by summarisation systems BIB15641201 BIB8411711 BIB339805 . Medical article abstracts may be structured or unstructured, and this factor plays a vital role in the performance of summarisers. Meta-data -In some cases, header information or meta-data associated with input documents play an important role in summarisation. For example, dates of publications are crucial for news items. In the case of the medical domain, databases such as MEDLINE use meta-data to indicate the key topics in each article. 3.2.2 Purpose. These factors are associated with the purpose of the summaries. In other words, these factors determine what a summary is for or what a summary is like. Summary Type -Summaries can either be extractive or abstractive. Extractive summarisation involves extracting content from the source document(s) and presenting them as the summary. Abstractive summarisation, in contrast, involves discovering the most salient contents in the source document(s), aggregating them, and presenting them in a concise manner (e.g. via techniques that automatically generate natural language) BIB5375832 . Information -Summaries can be generic or user-oriented. Generic summaries only take into account the information found in the input document(s), whereas user-oriented summaries attempt to extract and summarise only the information that are needed to fulfill information requirements of the users. The summarisation query enables the user to formulate the information needs. Use -This is the most important purpose factor  , and has a major influence on summary content and presentation. Audience -Summaries must take into account the intended audience. Different summaries can be generated from the same input sources to suit the requirements of the audience. News material, for example, "has at least two audiences: ordinary readers and analysts"  . Time -Time is a critical factor for some summarisation systems. For example, query-oriented summaries need to be delivered promptly, and thus, corresponding systems need to be very fast. 3.2.3 Output. These factors are associated with the summarised output. Coverage -Coverage of a set of sources by a summary can be either comprehensive or selective  . Reflective summaries are comprehensive (i.e., summarises the whole source text), while query-or topic-oriented summaries are selective (i.e., summarises only a segment of the source text that contains information associated with the query/topic)  . Compression -This refers to the amount by which the information from the source(s) are reduced during summarisation. Structure -The output of a summary may be plain text or the information may be represented using tables (e.g.,  ), forms BIB13538983 ), and lists (e.g., ) to name a few.