Answering. In recent years, medical document summarisation has received significant research attention, which attempt to make use of greater computational power and the availability of more sources of domain knowledge. A variety of document types are now addressed by the different approaches, and QA systems have been developed specific to this domain. Most work on query-focused summarisation in this research area has been executed under the broader domain of QA. While early NLP focused on domain-independent QA, restricted domain QA has received focus over the last decade BIB16534280 . Restricted domain QA, particularly in the medical domain, require incorporation of terminological and specialised domain-specific knowledge  BIB2831005 . Some research has focused primarily on question analysis and the coarse-grained classification as the first step for medical QA BIB13578700 . , and BIB8327279 , for example, study the answerability of clinical questions and attempt to classify clinical questions based on the Evidence Taxonomy BIB42126553 , and also into general topics. The QA approach proposed by BIB61451180 relies heavily on semantic information present on the questions and documents. First, candidate sentences are identified and phrases are extracted by identifying mappings between question and answer semantic types. The system has been evaluated for factoid and complex questions and is shown to have very good recall and precision (77% and 92% respectively). The use of medical semantic types to identify salient information in sentences based on query needs have been exploited in later, more comprehensive summarisation systems, which we discuss in the next subsection. Finally,  present a dynamic summarisation approach using an algorithm called Combo to identify salient semantic predications. It was shown to outperform several baseline methods in terms of recall and precision.