Summarisation of text in the medical domain requires the incorporation of significant amounts of domain-specific knowledge. There are numerous tools and knowledge resources currently available. Here we briefly introduce some of the important ones, starting with the resources. 4.1.1 UMLS. The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) 27 is a system and resource developed by the U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) for biomedical vocabularies. The development and maintainance of this system is targeted to aid language processing systems in the biomedical domain. The goal is to create standards and mappings for terminologies, and relationships between terminologies that automated systems can understand. More specifically, it was developed as "an effort to overcome two significant barriers to the effective retrieval of machine-readable information: the variety of names used to express the same concept and the absence of a standard format for distributing terminologies" BIB20287510 . The UMLS consists of the following three major components: -Metathesaurus -This is the major component of the UMLS and consists of a repository of inter-related biomedical concepts and terms obtained from several controlled vocabularies and their relationships. -Semantic Network -This provides a set of high-level categories and relationships used to categorise and relate the entries in the Metathesaurus. Each concept in the Metathesaurus is given a 'semantic type' and certain 'semantic relationships' may be present between members of the various semantic types. For example, a disease mention (e.g., headache) may have an is-treated-by relationship with a drug mention (e.g., aspirin). 4.1.2 SNOMED CT. SNOMED CT 28 is the most comprehensive source of medical terminology and is a standard in the U.S. for the exchange of health information electronically. It can be accessed via the NLM and the National Cancer Institute (NCI). It is one of the controlled vocabularies used by the UMLS.