• A. Sarker, D. Mollá, C. Paris automated identification of interventions and problems. The authors note that identification of outcomes is a much more difficult task, and they identify cue words (nouns, verbs and adjectives) that indicate the presence of outcomes in sentences. The outcome detection task is further subdivided into two sub-tasks -outcome identification and lexical boundary determination. In addition to sentence level outcome detection, the authors suggest that the polarity of outcomes play an important role in determining which sentences to choose as answers. Four categories of polarities are defined (positive, negative, no outcome and neutral). The authors use Support Vector Machines (SVMs) to classify sentences into the four categories, and show that best results are obtained by combining linguistic features with domain features. The outcomes of the polarity classification task are used in a multi-document summarisation approach to automatically find information from MEDLINE abstracts to answer a clinical question. Presence and polarity of outcomes, position of sentence in abstracts, length of sentences and Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR) are used as features in a machine learning algorithm (SVM) used to solve the summarisation problem. Sentences in MEDLINE abstracts cited by Clinical Evidence (CE) articles are manually annotated for each clinical query, and sentences obtained from the automated approach are compared with these for evaluation. A total of 197 abstracts from 24 subsections in CE are annotated to give a total of 2,298 sentences. The outcome detection task is shown to have an accuracy of 83%. The polarity assessment task is shown to have an accuracy of 79.42%. For the summarisation task, it is observed that the identification of outcomes and polarity improves performance significantly. However, F-scores are shown to be very low (<0.50) in all cases. ROUGE is also used for evaluation but shows little variation in performance for distinct combinations of features. The outcomes of the EpoCare project show that abstractive summarisation approaches, which utilise automatic polarity classification of sentences, have the potential to be applied for the generation of evidence-based summaries. 4.4.5 PERSIVAL. PERSIVAL (PErsonalized Retrieval and summarisation of Image, Video and Language) BIB15641201 is a medical digital library designed to provide customised access to a distributed library of multimedia medical literature. It is not possible to discuss the whole project in this review, and hence we focus on the text summarisation component of the system that produces customised, abstractive summaries for persons from technical and non-technical backgrounds BIB12059110 BIB10545685 . The summarisation system takes as input three different sources: patient records, medical articles (about cardiology) that are appropriate for the patient, and a query by the user from which key words are extracted. The input articles are classified as prognosis, treatment or diagnosis. Relevant sentences from the 'Results' sections of the articles are extracted and stored in in a pre-defined template, which contains three sets of information: parameter(s), findings, and relation. The relation describes the relation between a parameter and a finding. The information extraction phase also identifies the extent to which the parameters are dependent, along with other meta-data, such as the position of the sentence from which a parameter has been extracted BIB12059110 . Following the extraction, the information is filtered to keep only the portions that are relevant to the patient's medical records, and hand-crafted templates are filled with the extracted elements. In the next step, the filled templates are converted into semantic representations via mapping them into a graph. Repetitions (when two nodes are connected via multiple vertices of the same type) and contradictions (when two nodes are connected by multiple vertices of different types) are identified from the graphs, and this information is used to generate a coherent summary. The representation is then ordered for summary generation: relations that are deemed relevant to the user question are given the highest preference followed by recitations and contradictions, which in turn are followed by preference based on the relation type (e.g., relations representing risks are given higher priority than association relations). Finally, dependent relations identified from one template are output together, and the final summary is generated using natural language generation techniques, along with hyperlinks to medical concepts. The summaries generated by the system are not evidence-based, and the intent of the system is to provide personalised information for users from both technical and non-technical backgrounds. The approaches applied by this system have the potential of being applied for evidence-based summarisation. 4.4.6 AskHERMES. AskHERMES 38 BIB15241604 ] is a clinical QA system that is capable of taking queries in natural language, performs thorough query analysis, and generates single-document, query-focused extracts from a group of texts that are relevant to the query. The input to the system, being in natural language, requires minimal query formulation by the user, and the interface allows quick navigation of the summaries. The system is demonstrated to outperform Google and UpToDate when answering complex clinical questions. AskHermes operates in five phases: a query analysis module automatically identifies the information needs posed by questions by generating a list of informative query terms; a related questions extraction module identifies a list of questions that are similar, based on the terms; an information retrieval module returns the relevant documents; an information extraction module identifies relevant passages from the source documents; and a summarisation and answer presentation module that analyses the identified relevant passages, identifies and removes redundant elements, and finally outputs summaries with structure. In the query analysis phase, a query is first classified into one of 12 general topics BIB8327279 , and then keywords are automatically extracted from the question using Conditional Random Fields. Following the retrieval of relevant documents, a two-layer hierarchical clustering is applied to group passages into different topics. Query terms and their UMLS mappings are used to assign the cluster labels. The first layer of clustering generates the topic labels for a tree structures, and a second layer of clustering is applied to provide more refined categories. The final set of clusters are ranked based on the key query terms that are found in in them, and redundancies are detected and removed using longest common substrings. AskHERMES is shown to perform comparably to state-of-the-art systems, and its potential application in the field of EBM is very promising. One issue is that the lengthy summaries do not satisfy the requirement of bottom-line recommendations required by practitioners. Due to the extractive nature of the summarisation, it is difficult to synthesise information from multiple documents and generate brief summaries. However, the system's performance suggests that customising the summary generation process to the type of question may be beneficial. Furthermore, the authors show that key query terms can be used to determine topics. 4.4.7 QSpec. QSpec 39   BIB14836582 BIB205714398 ] is a summarisation system that attempts to generate evidence-based summaries to complex medical queries posed by practitioners.The system utilises a publicly available data set 40 , which consists of real-life clinical queries posed by practitioners, evidence-based justifications in response to the queries (single-document summaries), and bottom-line recommendations (multi-document summaries). The proposed system consists of two primary components: (i) query-focused summariser BIB205714398 , and (ii) automatic evidence grader . The summariser module performs single-document, extractive summarisation based on multiple domain-specific and domain-independent 38 Available at: http://www.askhermes.org/index2.html. Accessed on 15th Jan, 2016. 39 http://web.science.mq.edu.au/ ∼ diego/medicalnlp/. Accessed on 2nd February, 2015. 40 http://sourceforge.net/projects/ebmsumcorpus/. Accessed on 2nd February, 2015. features, such as sentence positions, lengths, sentence classes, UMLS semantic types, and others. The system takes as input questions in natural language. Following the retrieval of the relevant documents, 41 single-document summaries are generated by selecting the three most appropriate sentences from each document. The crucial part of this component is the sentence selection process, which utilises statistics derived from the annotated data in the corpus. Using statistics associated with a range of topics (e.g., question-specific semantic types, associations between semantic types, maximal marginal relevance and others), the system attempts to apply weights to each sentence score, and finally ranks the sentences based on the scores. Multi-document summaries are generated by performing automatic, contextual polarity classification of sentences BIB5765399 . In addition to the multi-document summaries for each evidence, a supervised learning approach that utilises a sequence of classifiers  ] is applied to grade the quality of the evidence. The system is shown to perform significantly better than several baseline and benchmark systems on a scale that employs ROUGE F-scores for relative comparison of systems BIB16282238 . However, the generation of multi-document summaries is described as a much more difficult task, and the contextual polarity classifier is only applied to a subset of the corpus that addresses therapeutic questions. This system illustrates the usefulness of annotated corpora for this task, and it is likely that future research will utilise the publicly available data set that this system has been trained on.