The phrase 'evidence-based medicine' was defined initially as "a process of turning clinical problems into questions and then systematically locating, appraising, and using contemporaneous research findings as the basis for clinical decisions" BIB9887368 . A more concrete and widely accepted definition of EBM was coined by  who explained it as "the conscientious, explicit, and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients." As the practice has evolved, medical practitioners increasingly integrate, as required by the latest clinical guidelines, the latest clinical evidence with their own expertise. In addition, practitioners are also required to incorporate the informed patients' choices. The long-term objective of EBM is to enhance the standard of healthcare, promote practices that are proven by evidence to work, and to identify elements of the practice that do not work. A patient-oriented approach is key to the practice-combining the best patient-oriented evidence with patient-centred care, placing the evidence in perspective with the needs and desires of the patient BIB20469704 . In the following sections, we provide an overview of EBM, discuss the problems associated with EBM practice, the resources and tools available for text processing in this domain and the solutions that NLP can offer. Incorporation of research evidence when making clinical decisions involves "the practice of assessing the current problem in the light of the aggregated results of hundreds or thousands of comparable cases in a distant population sample, expressed in the language of probability and risk" BIB28185566 ]. EBM therefore involves the efficient use of information search strategies to locate reliable and up-to-date information from varying sources and extraction strategies to efficiently collect and analyse retrieved information. The practice includes a process formally known as the Critical Appraisal Exercise which involves the following steps according to  : (1) clearly defining what the problem of a patient is, and what evidence is needed to address the patient's problems; (2) performing searches for the relevant literature efficiently; (3) selecting the best of the performed studies, and applying the guidelines of EBM to ascertain the validity of the studies; (4) appraising the quality of the evidence effectively; and (5) extracting and synthesising relevant evidences and applying them to the problem at hand. Defining a Patient Problem as a Clinical Question. Formulating the patient problem forms the basis for the clinical question, which is used to search resources for an evidence-based answer. A well formulated question includes information about a patient (symptoms, signs, test results and knowledge of previous treatments), the particular values and preferences of the patient, and other factors that could be relevant  ]. All that information should be summarised into a succinct question defining the problem and the specific additional items of information needed to solve the problem. There has been substantial research in the area of medical question formulation and query-focused summarisation, and, in recent years, particularly in the field of EBM (e.g., a recent example of research drive in this area is the CLEF eHealth shared tasks BIB32202561 ). This is because it has been shown that the answerability of questions can be largely increased by better query formulation among other things BIB12002798 . The PICO format, which has four components, has become the accepted framework for formulating patient-specific clinical queries BIB32595527 . The four components are: "primary Problem/Population, main Intervention, main intervention Comparison, and Outcome of intervention." The PICO components of queries represent key aspects of patient care, and have become very much the standard for formulating EBM queries. Although this query formulation framework was originally designed for treatment-like queries, it was later extended to other kinds of medical queries BIB204164600 ]. Research has shown that this mechanism of framing questions helps in the better formulating of clinical problems in queries, resulting in more accurate information retrieval results BIB46445583  . Although the PICO format has gained popularity with time, it is well known that not all clinical questions, because of the complex nature of the information needs, can be mapped in terms of PICO elements, and this is particularly true for non-therapy questions  . There is also evidence that even doctors find it difficult to formulate the questions in terms of the PICO format BIB23592841 . Variants of the framework have been suggested (e.g., PESICO BIB23180577 , PIBOSO BIB13339227 ); they offer more flexibility and comprehensiveness and have applications beyond query formulation. Conducting Literature Search. The medical domain has a massive amount of available published literature, scattered over many databases (e.g., MEDLINE 1 indexes over 24 million articles), and searching for relevant literature requires expertise in this area. Searching for appropriate literature can include searching from raw databases, databases with search filters, databases of pre-appraised articles, databases of synthesised articles and even personal contact with human sources. Some research has been carried out on strategies for retrieving high quality medical articles BIB53090884 BIB20035576 BIB10271788 . Searching for the correct literature is a rather tedious task, and it is in fact one of the major problems associated with EBM practice BIB1946105 . Selecting the Best Resources. The selected articles must be closely relevant to the problem at hand, and, simultaneously, they must have a good level of evidence. The level of evidence of a medical publication can be influenced by a number of factors such as the publication type and the sample size of the study. Checking the relevance of the papers requires a thorough analysis, and a ranking system is usually employed for examining the level of evidence of different sources. Medical publication types include Systematic Reviews (SR), Randomised Controlled Trials (RCT), Meta-Analyses (MA), single Case Studies, Tutorial Reviews and many more, including even personal opinions. Although all of them provide evidence of some form, their levels of evidence vary significantly. Figure 1 , slightly modified from the one provided by Gilbody [1996] , provides a ranking of some of the common medical article types (highest ranked on top). Fig. 1 : Quality of evidence with respect to publication types, adapted from Gilbody [1996] . A detailed analysis of these studies is outside the scope of this survey. Guidelines are available for healthcare practitioners to obtain information from each of these types of studies and evaluate their levels of evidence. Examples of guidelines available online include ASSERT (A Standard for the Scientific and Ethical Review of Trials) 2 , PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) 3 , and EQUATOR (Enhancing the QUAlity and Transparency Of health Research) 4 . Identifying Strengths and Weaknesses. Once relevant papers are identified, each paper must be studied in detail to extract the evidence it contains with respect to the problem at hand. Practitioners are particularly interested in studying in detail what type of study was conducted, on the number of subjects, demographic information about the subjects,the kind of intervention, the length of the follow-up period, and the outcome measures  ]. For quantitative tests, analysing the results of statistical tests is also an important task. Identification of the strengths and weaknesses provides a clear indication of the quality of the evidence provided by each article, and hence aids the practitioner to make the final decision. Applying Evidence to Patient Care. Practitioners make their final judgment considering the outcomes presented in the article(s) and the relevance of the article(s) to the problem at hand. Often, a number of articles suggest the same solution or a similar one, making it easier for the practitioner to make a decision. However, there are also cases when chosen articles provide contradictory outcomes. In such cases, practitioners have to choose between outcomes based on personal experience, the quality of evidence of the articles, the closeness of the articles to the given problem or other sources of evidence. Note that the quality of evidence here refers to the overall quality of the evidence obtained from all the articles combined, whereas the level of evidence of a single article refers to the reliability of that particular article only. • 0:5 Generally, countries have mandatory clinical practice guidelines that must be adhered to when performing EBM. Practitioners primarily navigate through these guidelines during practice. As such, it is actually often the providers/developers of clinical guidelines who are required to perform elaborate literature searches and follow the approaches mentioned above for the preparation of the appropriate practice guidelines. There has been research to identify a grading system that is suitable for the practice of EBM, and numerous requirements for the systems have been specified, some more important than others in typical EBM settings. BIB15294874 , for example, suggested two aspects-simplicity and clarity-so that identifying the quality of a body of evidence is fast and can be easily projected on to some grading scale. BIB25065961 mentioned the comprehensiveness of evidence appraisal systems as a key aspect so that the same grading system may be applied to different types of clinical studies such as treatment, diagnosis and prognosis.