We consider the problem of computing numerical invariants of programs, for ::: instance bounds on the values of numerical program variables. More ::: specifically, we study the problem of performing static analysis by abstract ::: interpretation using template linear constraint domains. Such invariants can be ::: obtained by Kleene iterations that are, in order to guarantee termination, ::: accelerated by widening operators. In many cases, however, applying this form ::: of extrapolation leads to invariants that are weaker than the strongest ::: inductive invariant that can be expressed within the abstract domain in use. ::: Another well-known source of imprecision of traditional abstract interpretation ::: techniques stems from their use of join operators at merge nodes in the control ::: flow graph. The mentioned weaknesses may prevent these methods from proving ::: safety properties. The technique we develop in this article addresses both of ::: these issues: contrary to Kleene iterations accelerated by widening operators, ::: it is guaranteed to yield the strongest inductive invariant that can be ::: expressed within the template linear constraint domain in use. It also eschews ::: join operators by distinguishing all paths of loop-free code segments. Formally ::: speaking, our technique computes the least fixpoint within a given template ::: linear constraint domain of a transition relation that is succinctly expressed ::: as an existentially quantified linear real arithmetic formula. In contrast to ::: previously published techniques that rely on quantifier elimination, our ::: algorithm is proved to have optimal complexity: we prove that the decision ::: problem associated with our fixpoint problem is in the second level of the ::: polynomial-time hierarchy.