The standard difference between two fuzzy numbers A and B is based on the difference between intervals  . For each α in the unit interval, it takes into account all the possible combinations between two elements, one from the α-level of A and the other from the α-level of B. Consequently, the result is always greater (in diameter) than any of the sets involved in the operation. Thus, the difference between two non-crisp numbers is always a non-crisp number and subtracting a non-crisp number from itself is never the crisp number zero. Using the Hukuhara difference BIB122918374 , the result of subtracting a non-crisp number A from itself (A ⊖ H A) is, in fact, zero. However, for this case, a necessary condition for the subtraction between two different fuzzy numbers A and B to exist is the first term to have bigger diameter than the second one. Generalizing the idea of this difference, BIB121514760  proposed the generalized Hukuhara difference, which also satisfies A − gH A = 0 and is defined for a bigger class of fuzzy numbers than the Hukuhara difference. An extension of generalized Hukuhara difference is the generalized difference   , which has the same results of the generalized Hukuhara operator (when it exists), but is defined for more pairs of fuzzy numbers. Another possibility is CIA (Constraint Interval Arithmetic) BIB14431044 . In this case, the diameter of the difference between two fuzzy numbers using CIA is smaller than using standard difference. All differences mentioned above makes use of the interval arithmetic on α-levels. Extensions to fuzzy numbers are drawn up via Stacking Theorem  over the resulting α-levels. Another way is similar to arithmetic for random variables, that is, the subtractions between fuzzy numbers are obtained using the joint possibility (or membership) distribution between the involved fuzzy numbers BIB17053652 . The comparison between the results obtained from two approaches is made via a kind of Nguyen's theorem extension BIB17053652 . In this study we present the definitions of all cited differences as well as its derivatives and we analyze its relations and exhibit an illustrative example.