The simplest classical model that describes the dynamics of transmitted diseases by direct contact without vital dynamics (i.e., without death/birth) is presented by the following equations [13] : Figure 1 : Relations between the differences defined by joint distribution and differences based on interval arithmetic. The dotted lines mean equality in the results of the subtractions between two fuzzy numbers (considering the mentioned hypothesis) . where S(t) and I(t) are respectively the proportions of susceptible and infected individuals at instant t and the parameter λ > 0 is the disease transmission rate. From (3), the sum of proportion of susceptible individuals (S) and the proportion of infected ones (I) is equal to 1, that is, The solution of (3) is given by Thus, from (4) it follows that In the epidemiological point of view (SI model), once an individual is infected he/she never gets recovered. Now, if in (3) we consider that initial condition is uncertain, for each t, the solutions (5) and (6) are uncertain too. If we suppose that S 0 (and I 0 ) is a fuzzy triangular number, from (4) we have on which difference we use. We compute I 0 , using each one of the differences between 1 and S 0 given in the last section. • If S 0 and I 0 are non-interactive, the difference between them is given by the standard form: • If the difference is given by T -norms (different from the minimum t-norm), that is, S 0 and I 0 are interactive, we have [ • If S 0 and I 0 are completely correlated, we have In that case, from Remark 3.13, • The Hukuhara difference does not exist, because we do not have an increasing diameter. On the other hand, the differences ⊖ g and ⊖ gH , which is equivalent to the triangular number Note that, S t and I t can not be triangular fuzzy numbers. In summay, from the coherence point of view, the difference that better represents the SI model is the completely correlated difference, because it is the one that best fits S + I = 1, which faces the hypothesis of non existence of vital dynamic. Moreover, intuitively, the hypotheses S + I = 1 suggests that there is interaction between S and I. A study for this case we made in   . The main reason for studying the difference between fuzzy numbers is due to connection with the derivatives.