Case: 16-5295 Document: 34-2 Filed: 12/19/2016 Page: 1

NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PUBLICATION File Name: 16a0684n.06

FILED
Dec 19, 2016
DEBORAH S. HUNT, Clerk

No. 16-5295

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT

DAVID JONES, Individually and on behalf of all )

persons similarly situated

)

)

Plaintiff-Appellant,

)

)

v.

)

)

CLARK COUNTY, KENTUCKY; FRANK DOYLE, )

Individually

)

)

Defendants-Appellees.

)

ON APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF KENTUCKY

BEFORE: MERRITT, ROGERS, and KETHLEDGE, Circuit Judges. ROGERS, Circuit Judge. This case presents a federal procedural due process challenge
to the practice of Kentucky jailers of sending a bill for incarceration costs to jailed prisoners who have subsequently been discharged without any sentence. After arrest, David Jones was admitted to the Clark County Detention Center. He spent fourteen months in jail, then left, and, five months thereafter, the accusations against him were dismissed. Clark County then billed Jones $4,000 for the costs of his incarceration. Jones paid $20, stopped paying, and sued Clark County and its jailor, asserting § 1983 and state claims both individually and on behalf of a class. The district court dismissed the federal claim and declined to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the state claims. Jones appeals, arguing once again that he has been deprived of procedural due process by the County and the County Jailor. Because Kentucky allowed Jones to challenge

Case: 16-5295
No. 16-5295 Jones v. Clark Cty.

Document: 34-2

Filed: 12/19/2016

Page: 2

the bill by refusing to pay it, Jones’s  procedural  due  process  rights  have  not  been  violated. We

do not have before us the separate question of whether federal substantive due process principles

permit the state to legislate the reimbursement obligation for which Jones was billed.

Kentucky’s   pay-for-your-own-incarceration statute generally requires prisoners to

reimburse the jailing county for the costs of their incarceration. KRS 441.265. Ordinarily, the

prisoners   “shall   be   required”   to   do   so   “by   the   sentencing   court.”      KRS 441.265(1). But the

jailing   county   may   compel   at   least   a   part   of   that   reimbursement   without   a   sentencing   court’s  

order,   because   the   jailing   county   may   “automatically   deduct[]”   funds   “from   the   prisoner’s  

property  or  canteen  account”  to  ensure  payment  of  the  fees.    KRS 441.265(6). Not all prisoners

have   to   pay   for   their   incarceration.      Prisoners   do   not   pay   if   “the   Department   of   Corrections   is  

financially   responsible   for   housing”   the   prisoner,   KRS 441.265(8), and the Department of

Corrections appears to be financially responsible   for   housing   “prisoners   charged   with   or  

convicted   of   violations   of   state   law,”   KRS 441.206(1)–(2). Convicted and indicted prisoners,

therefore, appear not to be billed for their incarceration. Merely arrested prisoners, who fail to

post bond and are incarcerated, may be billed after release, even if all charges against them are later dismissed, leaving them with no convictions and no sentences.1

Here, accepting as true all of its well-pleaded  factual  allegations,  Jones’s  complaint  sets  

out the following  facts.    On  October  26,  2013,  David  Jones  was  “arrested  and  admitted”  to  the  

Clark County Detention Center. He stayed there until December 15, 2014. On April 2, 2015, the

accusations against Jones were dropped “because   [Jones]   proved   he   was   entirely   innocent   of  

such  offenses.”    After  his  release,  Jones  received  a  bill  from  the  Clark  County  Detention  Center  

1 While a Kentucky court has approved the automatic withholdings from non-sentenced prisoners as consistent with Kentucky law, see Cole v. Warren County, 495 S.W.3d 712 (Ky. Ct. App. 2016), and while this court has approved that practice as consistent with the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, see Sickles v. Campbell Cty., 501 F.3d 726 (6th Cir. 2007), no court appears to have addressed the lawfulness of billing a released prisoner who was never convicted or sentenced, and whose charges were ultimately dismissed.
-2-

Case: 16-5295
No. 16-5295 Jones v. Clark Cty.

Document: 34-2

Filed: 12/19/2016

Page: 3

to   pay   “more   than   $4,000   for   the   costs   of   his   confinement.”      Jones   initially   paid   $20;;   he   then

stopped paying, on  his  counsel’s  advice.    

The  complaint  does  not  plead  why  Jones  was  arrested  or  what  Jones’s  bail  was,  if  any.    It  

also does not plead when, and with what, Kentucky formally charged Jones, before dismissing

those charges. Thus the complaint does not allege that Jones was billed for incarceration when

Kentucky gave Jones no option but to stay in jail; Jones may have been incarcerated because he

was allowed, but failed, to post bond.

Jones sued Clark County and Frank Doyle, the Clark County Jailer, both individually and

on behalf of all persons who were deprived of their property without due process of law when

the Clark County Detention Center billed them for the costs of their incarceration without an

order of a sentencing court. The complaint alleged that requiring prisoners to pay for their own

incarceration, where no trial court has convicted the prisoners and no sentencing court has

ordered the payments, violated Kentucky law and the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments of the

U.S. Constitution. The complaint also asserted various state-law claims of conspiracy,

negligence, conversion, fraud, and violations of the Kentucky Constitution.

Defendants Clark County and Boyle moved to dismiss all claims. As a part of that

motion, the defendants argued that Jones had not alleged a viable claim of violation of the Fourth

Amendment.      Jones   responded,   opposing   the   motion   to   dismiss,   but   “not   object[ing]”   to   the  

dismissal of his Fourth Amendment claims.

The district court granted the motion to dismiss, dismissing the federal claims with

prejudice, and dismissing the state claims without prejudice. Jones v. Clark Cty., No. 5:15-cv-

350-JMH, 2016 WL 1050743 (E.D. Ky. Mar. 11, 2016). Recognizing that Jones had not

objected to the dismissal of his Fourth Amendment claim, Jones, 2016 WL 1050743, at *2 n.1,

-3-

Case: 16-5295
No. 16-5295 Jones v. Clark Cty.

Document: 34-2

Filed: 12/19/2016

Page: 4

the   district   court   analyzed   only   whether   Jones’s   due   process   rights   under   the   Fourteenth  

Amendment had been violated, see id. at *2.    In  the  context  of  Jones’s  §  1983  claim,  then,  the  

two issues were whether Jones was deprived of a protected property interest and whether

Kentucky had failed to provide adequate process for that deprivation. Id. (citing Ky.   Dep’t   of  

Corr. v. Thompson, 490 U.S. 454, 460 (1989)). Assuming that Jones had a property interest in

the $20 of which he was deprived, id. (citing Bd. of Regents of State Colls. v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564,

571–73 (1972)),  the  district  court  concluded  that  Jones’s  due  process  rights  had  not  been  violated  

under the Mathews v. Eldridge balancing test, id. at *2–*6.

In conducting the Mathews v. Eldridge balancing test, the district court relied heavily on

this   court’s  opinion  in   Sickles v. Campbell Cty., 501 F.3d 726 (6th Cir. 2007). In Sickles, this

court  considered  whether  Kentucky  had  violated  prisoners’  due process rights when it withheld a

portion   of   the   transfers   by   friends   and   families   into   the   prisoners’   canteen   accounts,   which  

contained funds that the prisoners could use to purchase goods from the commissary, without an

order of a sentencing court. See Sickles, 501 F.3d at 728–29. After balancing the factors that the

panel identified in Mathews v. Eldridge, we concluded that no predeprivation hearing was

required for the withholdings. Sickles, 501 F.3d at 731. Here, the district court found that that

analysis controlled this case, because Jones raised no successful grounds on which to distinguish

Sickles. Jones, 2016 WL 1050743, at *4.

Jones’s  procedural due process rights have not been violated. The only action taken by

the   defendants   to   get   Jones’s   money   was   to   bill   for   it   and   accept   partial   payment.      This   is   not   a  

case in which the state has confiscated or converted property,  such  as  property  in  the  prisoner’s  

pockets, or amounts sent to him by friends, or Social Security checks sent to him. Instead Jones

was merely billed. We are pointed to no authority identifying a procedural due process right not

-4-

Case: 16-5295
No. 16-5295 Jones v. Clark Cty.

Document: 34-2

Filed: 12/19/2016

Page: 5

to be billed by the government for amounts that the billed person contends he does not owe. The

billed party, after all, still possesses and owns the money until some further process is imposed

upon him.

Stated in doctrinal terms, Jones does not have a property interest in not being billed.

The bill from Clark County, on its own, has not deprived Jones of a protected property interest.

A  protected  property  interest   is   “defined  by   existing  rules  or  understandings  that  stem  from   an  

independent source such as state law—rules or understandings that secure certain benefits and

that support claims of entitlement  to  those  benefits.”    Bd. of Regents v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 577

(1972). Jones points to no source of law that entitles him to enjoy his money unfettered by

government bills, correct or incorrect. An erroneously high bill from the government, without

more,   does   not   deprive   the   bill’s   recipient   of   a   protected   property   interest;;   the   IRS   does   not  

deprive a taxpayer of protected property interest every time it erroneously bills the taxpayer for

more unpaid taxes than is due. Jones’s  procedural  due  process claim thus fails at the outset.

Even if the process of billing and receiving partial payment could be thought of as a

deprivation of a property interest, such a deprivation is inherently protected by process. In this

case, process inheres in the action the government takes to get payment of the bill. The prisoner

can   refuse   to   pay   the   bill,   leaving   the   burden   on   the   jailer,   who   “may   file   a   civil   action   to   seek  

reimbursement   from   that   prisoner   for   any   amount   owed   which   remains   unpaid.”      KRS

441.265(3). In such a suit the defendant can raise all the state or federal issues he wants to

challenge his liability. In jail-reimbursement cases, in addition, a prisoner  can  “negotiat[e]”  with  

the   jailer,   and   the   jailer   may   “release   the   prisoner   from   all   or   part   of   the   prisoner’s   repayment  

obligation  if  the  jailer  believes  that  the  prisoner  will  be  unable  to  pay  the  full  amount  due.”    KRS

441.265(7).

-5-

Case: 16-5295
No. 16-5295 Jones v. Clark Cty.

Document: 34-2

Filed: 12/19/2016

Page: 6

Formally analyzed under the three-factor Eldridge test for what process is due, Jones’s

argument fails. We balance “[1]   the   private   interest   that   will   be   affected   by   the official

action; . . . [2] the risk of an erroneous deprivation . . . and the probable value, if any, of

additional or substitute procedural safeguards; and . . . [3] the Government’s interest, including

the function involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens that the additional or substitute

procedural  requirement  would  entail.” Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. at 335.

Balancing those factors, Jones was not due much process. In Sickles, this court balanced

the factors for a different aspect of this same pay-for-your-own-incarceration regime—the aspect

that   allows   Kentucky’s   county   jailers   automatically   to   withhold   a   portion   of   transfers   into  

prisoners’  canteen  accounts,  which  contain  funds that the prisoners can use at the commissary,

without the order of a sentencing court. See Sickles, 501 F.3d at 728–29. We concluded that

only   minimal   process   was   due   and   that   Kentucky’s   pay-for-your-own-incarceration statute did

not violate due process. See id. at 731. The same conclusion is required here.

First, the private interest at stake is minimal. Jones was merely billed for the

reimbursement. No property was seized. The lack of a clearly defined property interest in the

first place suggests that the property interest is minimal. Second, any risk of an erroneous

deprivation is minor and, as the district court suggested, less than the risk in Sickles. Jones,

2016 WL 1050743, at *4. In Sickles, we assessed the risk of an erroneous deprivation when the

county  automatically  withholds  a  portion  of  transfers  into  prisoners’  accounts.    We reasoned that

the   withholding   “involves   elementary   accounting   that   has   little   risk   of   error   and   is   non-

discretionary.”    Sickles, 501 F.3d at 730.    Here,  too,  elementary  accounting  determines  Jones’s  

bill—a simple multiplication of the per diem rate and the number of days spent in prison before

formal charges. Here, too, the bill is non-discretionary—as the district court explained,

-6-

Case: 16-5295
No. 16-5295 Jones v. Clark Cty.

Document: 34-2

Filed: 12/19/2016

Page: 7

“it applies  to  all  persons  confined  in  the  Jail.”   Jones, 2016 WL 1050743, at *4. Furthermore,

here, the risk of deprivation is diminished by process that the Kentucky statute provides to Jones,

but did not provide to Sickles, as indicated above. Third,  the  government’s  interest  in  being able

to proceed by billing is huge. It is hard to imagine how a government can obtain funds allegedly

owed to it without being able to send a bill. Moreover, it would be paradoxical to hold that

process should precede a bill. Due process at its core involves adequate notice, and a bill at its

essence provides notice of a debt. It would not make sense to require notice before sending a

notice.

We do not address the other argument that Jones makes at length on appeal: that he has

no obligation to pay under Kentucky’s  pay-for-your-own-incarceration statute, once it has been determined that he will not be sentenced.2 This is presented as a state-law issue rather than as a

federal issue. The district court below  declined  to  exercise  supplemental  jurisdiction  over  Jones’s  

state law claims under 28 U.S.C. § 1367. We interpret this ruling as extending to claims based

on  the  scope  of  the  Kentucky  statute,  notwithstanding  the  district  court’s  discussion  of  the  issue

as part of its due process analysis. See Jones, 2016 WL 1050743, at *6. Declining to exercise

jurisdiction over the state law issues was appropriate. “Although  [§  1983]  provides  the  citizen  

with an effective remedy against those abuses of state power that violate federal law, it does not

provide  a  remedy  for  abuses  that  do  not  violate  federal  law.”    Collins v. City of Harker Heights,

503 U.S. 115, 119 (1992). We take no position on the state law issue. If the state were to sue to

enforce the obligation, Jones could still contend that the Kentucky statute does not require him to

2 Jones declined to argue on appeal in this case—at least until oral argument—that federal substantive due process requires  that  result.    Any  such  argument  is  implicit  at  most  in  his  briefing.    “Generally  speaking[,] . . . a party does not   preserve   an   argument   by   raising   it   for   the   first   time   at   oral   argument.”      United States v. Huntington National Bank, 574 F.3d 329, 331 (6th Cir. 2009).
-7-

Case: 16-5295
No. 16-5295 Jones v. Clark Cty.

Document: 34-2

Filed: 12/19/2016

Page: 8

pay. Counsel for the defendants in this case, however, at oral argument disavowed any further

efforts to obtain the $4,000 beyond the $20 already received.

The judgment of the district court is affirmed.

-8-

