Instance-transfer method refers to the data sharing of the source and target domain. It can be filtered from source domain by re-weight. Through it, data from the target domain can be augmented with the labeled source domain samples. Several classic algorithms for transfer learning will be introduced at first. TrAdaBoost BIB8153773 is an algorithm for extracting instances from source data, which combines some of the available labeled source data with a small number of labeled target data to construct a more accurate model than simply using labeled target data. The algorithm works well when the source data and the target data have many similarities, but if the samples in the target data have more noise, it is possible to increase the difficulty of training the classifier. Vieriu et al. BIB4409168 proposed a boosting-based transfer learning method, which can transfer knowledge to different target areas in the training field by learning training samples from multiple fields, and reduce the cost of labeling target areas. Wang and Li  introduced a transfer learning method based on boosting framework and distributed measurement method. They believe that the TrAdaBoost algorithm forces the boosting mechanism to ignore valuable data while learning valuable data, but it is still not perfect. CP-MDA BIB52308023 (conditional probability based multi-source domain adaptation) can correct the difference in conditional distribution between the two domains. The core idea is to use the source domain classifier to tag unlabeled data in the target domain. The first step is to assign a classifier to the source domain, and then find a weight value for each classifier as a function of the proximity of the two domains in the conditional distribution between the two domains. The weighted combination source domain classifier creates a learning task by accumulating a pseudo tag for the unlabeled target domain data. Finally, the target learner is trained based on the tagged target domain data and the target domain data of the pseudo tag. 2SW-MDA BIB52308023 (two stage weighing framework for multisource domain adaptation), which is an upgraded version of CP-MDA, can handle the difference in edge distribution. The algorithm can calculate the weight for each source domain by the difference of the edge distribution between the two domains, and use the weight as a function of the difference of the conditional distribution obtained in the CP-MDA method. The innovation of the method is to calculate the weight of the source domain as a conditional probability function. Next, we will introduce examples on the application of transfer learning algorithms for sentiment analysis. Xu et al. BIB13903924 proposed the instance level transfer learning method applied to cross lingual opinion analysis, and translated other useful markup languages into target language as supplementary training data to improve the opinion classification in the target language. TrAdaBoost BIB8153773 algorithm is used to reduce the impact of low quality translation corpus. The algorithm effectively improves the current situation of opinion analysis of resource-scarce languages by using small target language training data and large cross lingual training data. Transfer learning can use the source domain data to augment the target domain data by the above method, but in the process of transfer, misclassification may occur to cause negative transfer, that is, the knowledge learned in the source domain has a negative effect on learning on the target domain. In response to the above problems, Gui et al. BIB42989023 proposed a negative transfer detection method for cross lingual analysis, which examines and removes the noise of the training samples by detecting high quality samples. This method can effectively reduce the misclassification by iterative means. Serikawa and Lu BIB26575259 introduced a fast joint trigonometric filtering dehazing algorithm that can detect and reduce the VOLUME 7, 2019 image noise, it can be used as a reference for noise detection of cross lingual analysis. Wang et al.  described an adaptive training data selection method, which can effectively avoid the noisy and fuzzy of source domain training data. The iterative method is used to combine the samples from the source domain and the target domain training data by using the informativeness measures, to evaluate the performance of the classifier of the target domain, and to update the informativeness measures of the next iteration.