Parameter-transfer method leverages the parameter sharing model of the source and target domains. Using the parametertransfer method, scholars can transfer the trained model parameters in a large number of datasets to the target task. In the parameter-transfer method applied to the NLP field, word2vec BIB5959482 which is a simple transfer technology only for the first layer of the model has many applications, which has a great impact in practice and be used in many advanced technology. Glorot et al. BIB18235792 studied the domain adaptive problem of sentiment classifiers, using Stacked Denoising Autoencoder (SDA) to solve edge distribution differences. The first step of the algorithm is to find an invariant potential feature space by the input space that has been trained by the Stacked Denoising Auto-encoder, and then uses the potential features and the labeled source data to train the classifier. This method is excellent in comment sentiment analysis, but it is more dependent on parameter initialization. The marginalized SDA (mSDA) BIB10686834 algorithm, which improved the shortcomings of the SDA algorithm: high computational cost and lack of scalability of high-dimensional features. The algorithm has powerful feature learning capabilities and does not require optimization algorithms to train parameters. Sun BIB7878543 proposed a modified version of the mSDA ++ algorithm for the marginalized SDA (mSDA), which can learn low-dimensional features. The combination of mSDA and EASYADAPT algorithm can improve the accuracy of text classification. In addition, the mSDA ++ algorithm accelerates subsequent calculations and reduces data storage space. Mccann et al. BIB9447219 and Peters et al. BIB3626819 used a method of combining embedding from other tasks with different levels of input. Mccann et al. BIB9447219 trained the neural network model through an English-German translation task to obtain an output called ''context vectors (CoVe)''. They used CoVe for many NLP tasks, including semantic sentiment analysis, problem classification, text implied, question and answer. Figure 2 is a schematic diagram of the process about combining other tasks with the target task. Peters et al. BIB3626819 proposed EMLo (Embeddings from Language Models), which is a method for extracting word vectors of deep semantic features. It can train the bidirectional LSTM model (biLM) on the big corpus at first, then connect its own neural network directly on the basis of biLM, take the output of biLM as the input of its own network, and use LSTM to generate characterization of words. In this way, a richer word representation can be introduced and applied to many types of NLP tasks, but this method still trains the main task model from the beginning, and regards pre-training embedding as a fixed parameter, limiting its effect. Dai and Le  first put forward a fine-tuning of the language model (LM) and proposed two methods for improving sequence learning with recurrent networks using unlabeled data.The function of the first method is to predict the subsequent content in the sequence; the second method can use the sequence-autoencoder to select the input sequence into the vector and predict the input again. Figure 3 is the model structure. The two algorithms can be exploited as pre-training algorithms for post-supervised sequence learning algorithms, enabling powerful performance in many classification tasks. However, applicability is limited severely due to the need for millions of intra-domain documents to achieve good performance. Howard and Ruder BIB40100965 proposed the Universal Language Model Fine-tuning (ULMFiT), which can be exploited to NLP. ULMFit recommends training language models on very large corpus to contain more semantic information and use it as the backbone of the classifier. When applying it to different FIGURE 2. Schematic diagram of the process about combining other tasks with the target task BIB9447219 . FIGURE 3. Self-encoder model structure  . datasets, you only need to fine-tune the parameters of the language model to take these differences into account, then add a classifier layer at the top of the language model and train only that layer. Howard J et al. have provided pretrained language models. Figure 4 is a training procedure for ULMFiT.