Sentiment analysis is a subdivision of text mining, which uses natural language processing and related computer technology to automatically extract or classify emotions in text  . The research object includes various information on the web such as hot topics which attracted users on social media. Sentiment analysis has a very wide range of applications. For instance in the consumer industry, user preference for different commodities can be obtained through the analysis of product reviews to help companies adjust sales strategies and make decisions. In social media BIB32838462 - BIB31147806 , sentiment analysis of event comments plays an important role in public opinion control and emergency detection. Since the beginning of 2000, sentiment analysis has become one of the most active research fields in natural language processing (NLP)  . In recent years, there have been many studies on sentiment analysis  , BIB15847221 , BIB18580557 . Zhang et al.  studied the sentiment analysis based on deep learning, and discussed the recent papers from three aspects that include aspect level, sentence level and document level. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Huimin Lu. Kharde and Sonawane BIB15847221 gave a research review of sentiment analysis techniques based on Twitter data, compared existing analysis techniques such as machine learning and lexiconbased methods, and discussed the challenges and applications of sentiment analysis on Twitter. Cambria BIB18580557 divided the basic tasks of sentiment analysis into sentiment recognition and polarity detection, pointing out that the former focuses on extracting a set of emotional tags. In the current surveys of sentiment analysis, most of the sentiment analysis methods are classified from two perspectives. One is according to the granularity of text analysis, which is divided into three aspects: document level, statement level and aspect level. The other is according to the principle of method, it is mainly divided into three types: rule-based, machine learning, and deep learning. However, with the increasing volume of information, the collected data that need to be analyzed are huge, chaotic and irregular. This has brought more difficulties for sentiment analysis such as large data labeling and high cost of computing. Although the traditional sentiment analysis methods have some advantages, they are more limited due to massive data in practical application. Therefore, researchers combined sentiment analysis with transfer learning. Transfer learning BIB740063 is an important research direction in machine VOLUME 7, 2019 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/ FIGURE 1. CNN model architecture for processing a sentence  . learning. It utilizes the similarity of data, data distribution or task. In this survey, we comprehensively summarize the sentiment analysis based on transfer learning, and hope to help people have a more all-sided and deep understanding of sentiment analysis. The main contributions of this survey are as follows: (1) The sentiment analysis methods are divided into traditional methods, deep learning methods, and transfer learning methods. And the point is on the summary of sentiment analysis methods based on transfer learning. (2) Summarize and compare the frequently used datasets of current sentiment analysis. (3) Discuss the challenges and opportunities of the current sentiment analysis.