Transfer learning is the method that uses the similarity of data, data distribution, model, task and so on to apply the knowledge already learned in one domain to the new domain. Through transfer learning, the labeled data can be used to construct the model and be used in the target domain data to increase the annotation of the target data. Before we introduce different sentiment analysis methods based on transfer learning, we first describe some notations and categories that be used in the paper. Domain: Consists of data features and feature distributions, including the source domain and domain, where the source domain exists knowledge and the target domain needs to be learned. Task: Includes the objective function and learning outcomes for the purpose of learning. In a review article made by Pan and Yang BIB740063 , a more authoritative definition of transfer learning has been made, and according to the learning method, the transfer learning is divided into four categories, namely instancetransfer approach, feature-representation-transfer approach, parameter-transfer approach and relational-knowledgetransfer approach. Zhang and Yang  also introduced Multi-Task Learning (MTL), analyzed the characteristics of different methods, discussed the combination of MultiTask Learning (MTL) and other learning paradigms. Weiss et al. BIB3761015 conducted a detailed survey about the related methods and applications of transfer learning, divided the transfer learning methods into two categories: homogeneous and heterogeneous, and discussed the negative transfer problem. At the same time, many scholars have made surveys on transfer learning applications, such as research  on Visual Domain Adaptation and research BIB2670121 on Activity Recognition. In the next section, the transfer learning methods applied in sentiment analysis will be introduced, and it will be discussed comprehensively in three categories: parametertransfer methods, instance-transfer methods and featurerepresentation-transfer methods.