Network text has the characteristics of diversity and multidomain, so people hope to apply sentiment analysis algorithms to further exploration of text in different domains. Sentiment analysis has certain limitations on its corpus, and it is difficult for texts in different domains to train sentiment analysis models through the same corpus. For example, when the model trained by the Film Review Corpus is used to analyze the emotion of restaurant reviews, the performance of the model tends to be poor due to excessive differences between the two domains, and the restaurant evaluation cannot be analyzed accurately. Based on this, we must use specific corpus according to different text fields such as film reviews and restaurant reviews, but in reality, there are not enough data in many fields to support scholars' research on sentiment analysis, so cross-domain sentiment analysis has gradually become a hot topic of sentiment analysis. Cross-domain transfer learning aims to use source data from other domains to help target learning tasks BIB740063 , which is used by more scholars in cross-domain sentiment analysis. Different domains of data have different feature spaces and data distributions. In this case, the research purpose is to extract the features that are useful in both target and source domains, and to obtain the shared feature space of cross-domain transfer learning problem. Some scholars select the best features of the source and target domains and reweight them to improve the final classification BIB14640650 . This process can be described as two phases. The first of which is to extract the common features of the two domains, and then the classifier is trained according to the useful features of the target domain BIB37849909 . However, the two-stage operation may be inconsistent due to the difference in feature space. To overcome this shortcoming, Maracini et al. BIB52915936 proposed CD-ALMA (Cross-Domain Aspect Label Propagation through Heterogeneous Networks), which has been proved to have a great effect by using heterogeneous networkbased representations to combine different features into nodes in the network and then exploring language representations through tag propagation algorithms for heterogeneous networks. However, cross-domain transfer learning still has certain problems, such as the selection of source domain, the noise interference in the combination of source domain and target domain, the optimization of the combination of source domain and target domain combined with feature space, etc., which brings challenges to cross-domain sentiment analysis.