Traditional sentiment analysis methods include lexiconbased approaches and non-neural network classifier approaches. The lexicon-based method BIB2024 - BIB62647653 refers to judging the sentiment polarity by constructing an emotional dictionary, extracting emotional values, etc. Turney and Littman BIB2024 proposed the use of semantic polarity (ISA) algorithm to analyze text sentiment tendency. Hu and Liu BIB207155218 generated a dictionary containing positive and negative sentiment words through seed words in WordNet, and classify sentences according to the dictionary. Bravo-Marquez et al. BIB16294426 introduced a method of expanding the opinion lexicon in a supervised manner. An improved SO-PMI algorithm has been proposed by Yang et al. BIB62647653 , which is more effective for emotional computing and emotional vocabulary modeling. The lexicon-based approach is easy to operate, but it relies heavily on the sentiment dictionary, and ignores the connection of the positional between words. The extraction of the text is simplistic and not comprehensive. The non-neural network classifier belongs to the supervised machine learning method, which is realized by manual labeling and training model. The most common classifiers are Naive Bayes (NB) BIB14513167 -  , Maximum Entropy BIB15347866 - BIB7611843 , and SVM BIB18458666 -  . These classifiers perform well in different classification fields such as image classification BIB18232454 and text classification. With the increase of data volume and the need of diverse tasks, more scholars use the neural network model based on deep learning to apply to sentiment analysis tasks and achieve better results.