Although there is little work in the literature survey of NMT, some other works are highly related. Lipton et al. have summarized the conventional methods in sequence learning  , which provided essential information for the origin of NMT as well as the related base knowledge. Britz et al. and Tobias Domhan have done some model comparison work in NMT with experiment and evaluation in the practical performance of some wildly accepted technologies, but they have rare theoretical analysis, especially in presenting the relationship between different proposed models BIB2201909  . On the other hand, some researchers limited their survey work on a special part related to NMT the Attention Mechanism, but both of them have a general scope that oriented to all kinds of AI tasks with Attention BIB102350916 BIB59606205 . Maybe the most related work was an earlier doctoral thesis written by Minh-Thang Luong in 2016  , which included a comprehensive description about the original structure of NMT as well as some wildly applied tips. This paper, however, focuses on a direct and up-to-date literature survey about NMT. We have investigated a lot about the relevant literature in this new trend and provided comprehensive interpretation for current mainstream technology in NMT. As for concrete components, this literature survey investigates the origin and recent progresses in NMT, categorizes these models by their different orientation in the model structure. Then we demonstrate the insight of these NMT types, summarize the strengths and weaknesses by reviewing their design principal and corresponding performance analysis in translation quality and speed. We also give a comprehensive overview of two components in NMT development, namely attention mechanism and vocabulary coverage mechanism, both of which are indispensable for current achievement. At last, we give concentration on some literature which proposed advanced models with comparison work; we introduce these considerable models as well as the potential direction in future work. Regarding the survey scope, some subareas of NMT with less attention were deliberately left out of the scope except with brief description in future trend. These include but are not limited to the literature of robustness of NMT, domain adaptation in NMT and other applications that embed NMT method (such as speech translation, document translation). Although the research scope has been specifically designed, due to the numerous of researches and the inevitable expert selection bias, we believe that our work is merely a snapshot of part of current research rather than all of them. We are hoping that our work could provide convenience for further research. The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides an introduction of machine translation and presents its history of development. Section III introduces the structure of NMT and the procedure of training and testing. Section IV discusses attention mechanism, an essential innovation in the development of NMT. Section V surveys a variety of methods in handling word coverage problem and some fluent divisions. Section VI describes three advanced models in NMT. Finally, Section VII discusses the future trend in this field.