Related researches have proposed various methods in both the training and inference process. Further, these methods can be roughly divided into three categories based on their different orientations. The first one is intuitively focused on finding solutions in improving computation speedup, which could support a more extensive vocabulary. The second one focus on using context information, this kind of method can address some of the unknown words(such as Proper Noun) by copying them to translation result as well as low-frequency words which cause a poor translation quality. The last one, which is more advanced, prefers to utilize information inside the word such as characters, because of their flexibility in handling morphological variants of words, this method can support translating OOV words in a more "intelligent" way. 1) methods by computation speedup: For computation speedup method, there are lots of literature that implement their idea in NLM training. The first thought in trying computation speedup is to scale the sof tmax operation. Since an effective sof tmax calculation could obviously support a larger vocabulary, this kind of trying has got a lot of attention in NLM literature. Morin & Bengio [53] proposed hierarchical models to get an exponential speedup in the computation of normalization factor, thus help to accelerate the gradient calculation of word probabilities. In concrete details, the original model has transformed vocabulary into a binary tree structure, which was built with pre-knowledge from WordNet  . The initial experiment result shows that this hierarchical method is comparable with traditional trigram LM but fails to exceed original NLM; this is partly because of utilizing handcrafted feature from WordNet in the tree building process. As a binary tree can provide a significant improvement in cost-effective between the speed with performance, further work still focuses on this trend to find better refinement. Later on, Mnih & Hinton followed this work by removing the requirement of expert knowledge in tree building process BIB10097073 . A more elegant method is to retain the original model but change the method in calculating the normalization factor. Bengio & Senecal proposed importance sampling method to approximate the normalization factor BIB15022745 . However, this method is not stable unless with a careful control BIB9147661 . Mnih & Teh used noise-contrastive estimation to learn the normalization factor directly, which can be more stable in the training process of NLM BIB6633369 . Later, Vaswani et al. proposed a similar method with application in MT BIB3065236 . The above methods are difficult to be implemented parallelly by GPUs. Further consideration found solutions that are more GPU friendly. Jean et al. alleviated the computation time by utilizing a subset of vocabulary as candidate words list in the training process while used the whole vocabulary in the inference process. Based on the inspiration of using importance sampling in earlier work BIB9147661 , they proposed a pure data segmentation method in the training process. Specifically, they pre-processed the training data sequentially, choosing a subset of vocabulary for each training example with the number of its distinct words reached threshold t(which is still far less than the size of original vocabulary). In the inference process, they still abandon using the whole vocabulary and proposing a hybrid candidate list alternatively. They composed candidate words list from two parts. The first part is some specific candidate target words that translated from a pre-defined dictionary with the others are the K-most frequent words. In the practical performance analysis, this method remains the similar modest size of candidate words in the training process; thus, it can maintain the computational efficiency while supporting an extremely larger size of candidate words BIB2863491 . Similarly, Mi et al. proposed vocabulary manipulation method which provides a separate vocabulary for different sentences or batches, it contains candidate words from both word-to-word dictionary and phrase-to-phrase library BIB1371374 . Besides all kinds of corresponding drawbacks in the above method, the common weakness of all these methods is they still suffer from the OOV words despite a larger vocabulary size they can support. This is because the enlarged vocabulary is still size limited, and there's no solution for complementary when encountering unknown words, whereas the following category of methods can partly handle it. In addition, simply increasing the vocabulary size can merely bring little improvement due to the Zipfs Law, which means there is always a large tail of OOV words need to be addressed BIB969555 . 2) methods by using context information: Besides the above variants which focus on computation speed-up, a more advanced category is using context information. Luong et al. proposed a word alignment algorithm which collaborates with Copy Mechanism to post-processing the translation result. This old but useful operation was inspired by the common word(phrase) replacement method in SMT and has achieved a pretty considerable improvement in BLEU BIB1245593 . Concretely, in Luong's method, for each of the OOV words, there's a "pointer" which map to the corresponding word in the source sentence. In the post-processing stage, a predefined dictionary was provided with "pointer" to find the corresponding translation, while using directly copy mechanism to handle the OOV words that not in the dictionary. The Besides that, they synthesized Copy Mechanism with general translation operation by adding a so-called switching network to decide which operation should be applied in each timestep, this could be thought to improve the generalization of the whole model. BIB969555 . Gu et al. made parallel efforts in integrating different mechanisms, they proposed a kind of Attention Mechanism called CopyNet with the vanilla encoder-decoder model, which can be naturally extended to handle OOV words in NMT task BIB8174613 . Additionally, they found that the attention mechanism has driven more by the semantics and language model when using traditional word translation, but by location when using copying operation. Fig. 11 . An example of one kind of Copy Mechanism proposed by Luong et al. BIB1998416 , the subscripts of < unk > symbol (refer as d)is a relative position of corresponding source words, where the alignment relation is a target word at position j is aligned to a source word at position i = j + d. Besides the Copy Mechanism, using extra knowledge is also useful in handling some other linguistic scenarios, which is highly related to the vocabulary coverage problem. Arthur et al. incorporated lexicons knowledge to assist with translation in low-frequency words BIB10086161 . Feng et al. proposed a similar method with a memory-augmented NMT (M-NMT) architecture, and it used novel attention mechanism to get the extra knowledge from the dictionary that constructed by SMT  . Additionally, using context information can also be applied to improve the translation quality of ambiguous words (Homographs) BIB4410027 . In a nutshell, there are many context-based refinements have been proposed, most of them using Copy Mechanism to handle the OOV words with various of alignment algorithm to locate the corresponding word in the target side. However, these kinds of methods have a limited room for further improvement because the Copy Mechanism is too crude to handle the sophisticated scenarios in different languages. Practically, these methods perform poorly in languages which are rich morphology like Finnish and Turkish, which motivated method with better generalization BIB1689426 . 3) Methods in fine grit level: This sub-section introduce some more "intelligent" ways that focus on using additional information inside the word unit. It's obviously that such additional information could enhance the ability in covering the various of the linguistic phenomenon. In previous research, although using semantic information of word unit could provide the vast majority of learning features, other features in sub-word level are generally ignored. From the perspective of linguistic, the concept of "word" is the basic unit of language but not the minimum one in containing semantic information, and there are abundant experienced rules could be learned from the inside of word units like shape and suffix. Comparing with identity copy or dictionary translation which regards the rare words as an identical entity, the refined method using fine-grit information is more adaptable. Further, a more "radical" method was proposed, which just treats words in character level completely. It would be an innovative concern for future work. In this category, one popular choice is using the subword unit, the most remarkable achievement was proposed by Sennrich et al., which has been proved to have the best performance in some shared result BIB1114678 . Concretely, in this design, they treat unknown words as sequences of sub-word units, which is reasonable in terms of the composition of the vast majority of these words(e.g., named entities, loanwords, and morphologically complex words). In order to represent these OOV words completely, one intuitive solution is to build a predefined sub-word dictionary that contains enough variants of units. However, restoring the sub-words cause massive space consumption in vocabulary size, which is effectively cancels out the whole purpose of reducing the computational efficiency in both time and space. Under this circumstances, a Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) based sub-words extraction method was applied for word segmentation operation in both sides of languages, which successfully adapted this old but effective data compression method in text pre-processing. In concrete details of this adapted BPE method, it alternated merging frequent pairs of bytes with characters or sequence of characters, and word segmentation process followed the below steps: (1) Prepare a large training corpus(generally are bilingual corpus). (2) Determined the size of the sub-word vocabulary. (3) Split the words to a sequence of characters (using a special space character for marking the original spaces). (4) Merge the most frequent adjacent pair of characters (e.g., in English, this may be c and h into ch). (5) Repeat step 4 until reaching the fixed given number of times or the defined size of the vocabulary. Each of these steps would increase the vocabulary by one. The figure shows a toy example of the method. As for the practical result of word segmentation, the most frequent words will be merged as single tokens, while the rare words(which is similar to the OOV words in previous categories' work) may still contain un-merged sub-words. However, they have been found rare in processed text BIB1114678 . Further work of BPE method has also been proposed to obtaining a better generalization. Taku proposed subword regularization in later as an alternative to handle the spurious ambiguity phenomenon in BPE, and they further proposed a new subword segmentation algorithm based on a uni-gram language model, which shares the same idea with BPE but was more flexible in getting multiple segmentation based on their probabilities. Similarly, Wu et al. used "workpieces" concept to handle the OOV words which were once applied on the Google speech recognition system to solve Japanese/Korean segmentation problem BIB22320655 BIB3603249 . This method breaks words into word pieces to get a balance between flexibility with efficiency when using single characters and full words separately. Another notable concern is modeling sequence in characters-level. Inspired by using character-level information completely in building NLM BIB686481 , Costa-jussa' & Fonollosa used CNN with highway network to model the characters directly BIB1712853 , they deployed this architecture in source side with a common word-level generation in target side. Similarly, Ling et al. and Ballesteros et al. have proposed model respectively that using RNN(LSTM) to build character level embedding and composes it into the word embedding BIB1689426 [98], this idea later has been applied in building an RNN based character-level NMT model BIB5799549 . More recently, BIB13972671 proposed a hybrid model that combines the word level RNN with character level RNN for assist BIB13972671 . Concretely, Luongs' method translates mostly at the word level, when encounter an OOV word, character level RNN would be used for the consult. The figure shows the detailed architecture of this model. On the other hand, the trying of designing a fully characterlevel translation model has also got attention accordingly. Chung et al. used BPE method to extract a sequence of subword in encoder side, they just varied the decoder by using pure characters, and it has indicated to provide comparable performance with models uses sub-words BIB13495961 . Motivated by aforementioned work, Lee et al. proposed fully character-level NMT without any segmentation, it was based on CNN pooling with highway layers, which can solve the prohibitively slow speed of training in Luong and Manning's work BIB10509498 . VI. ADVANCED MODELS This section gives a demonstration of some advanced models that have got the state-of-the-art performance, while all of them belong to different categories of model structure. Experimental result indicated that all these networks can achieve similar performance with different advantages in their corresponding aspects.