After the training period, the model could be used for translation, which is called inference. The inference procedure is quite similar to the training process. Nevertheless, there is still a clear distinction between training and inference: at decoding time, we only have access to the source sentence, i.e., encoder hidden state. There is more than one way to perform decoding. Proposed decoding strategies include Sampling and Greedy search, while the latter one is generally accepted and be evolved as Beam-search. 1) General decoding work flow (greedy): The idea of greedy strategy is simple, as we illustrate in Fig. 4 . The Greedy strategy is only considering the predicted word with the highest probability. In the implementation of our illustration, the previously generated word would also be fed to the network together with the thought vector in the next time-step. The detailed steps are as follows: 1. The model still encodes the source sentence in the same way as during the training period to obtain the thought vector, and this thought vector is used to initialize the decoder. 2. The decoding (translation) process will start as soon as the decoder receives the end-of-sentence marker < EOS > of source sentence. 3. For each time-step on the decoder side, we treat the RNN's output as a set of logits. We choose the word with the highest translation probability as the emitted word, whose ID is associated with the maximum logit value. For example, in Fig. 4 , the word "moi" has the highest probability in the first decoding step. We then feed this word as an input in the next time-step. The probability is thus conditioned on the previous prediction (this is why we call it "greedy" behavior). 4. The process will continue until the ending symbol < EOS > is generated as an output symbol. 2) Beam-search: While the Greedy search method has produced a pretty good result, Beam-search is a more elaborated one with better results. Although it is not a necessary component for NMT, Beam-search has been chosen by most of NMT models to get the best performance BIB2201909 . The beam-search method was proposed by other sequence learning task with successful application BIB17194112  . It's also the conventional technique of MT task that has been used for years in finding the most appropriate translation result  [32] BIB384994 . Beam-search can be simply described as retaining the top-k possible translations as candidates at each time, where k is called the beam-width. In the next time-step, each candidate word would be combined with a new word to form new possible translation. The new candidate translation would then compete with each other in log probability to get the new top-k most reasonable results. The whole process continues until the end of translation. Concretely, the beam search can be formulated in the following steps: Besides the standard Beam-search which finds the candidate translation only by sorting log probability, this evaluation function mathematically tends to find shorter sentence. This is because a negative log-probability would be added at each decoding step, which lowers the scores with the increasing length of sentences BIB1697424 . An efficient variant for alleviating this scenario is to add a length normalization  . A refined length normalization was also proposed by Wu et al. BIB3603249 . Another kind of refined method in Beam-search is adding coverage penalty, which helps to encourage the decoder to cover the words in the source sentence as much as possible when generating an output sentence BIB3603249 BIB146843 . In addition, since this method finds k times of translation(rather than one) until getting the final result, it generally makes the decoding process more time-consuming. In practice, an intuitive solution is to limit the beam-width as a small constant, which is a trade-off between the decoding efficiency and the translation accuracy. As reported by a comparison work, an experimental beam width for best performance is 5 to 10 BIB2201909 .