The encoder is built by 6 identical components, each of which contains one multi-head attention layer with a fully connected network above it. These two sub-layers are equipped with residual connection as well as layer normalization. All the sub-layers have the same dimension of 512 in output data. The decoder, however, is more complicated. There are also 6 components stacked; and in each component, three sublayers are connected, including two sub-layers of multi-head self attention and one sub-layer of fully-connected neural network. Specifically, the bottom attention layer is modified with method called masked to prevent positions from attending to subsequent positions, which is used for avoiding the model to look into the future of the target sequence when predicting the current word. Additionally, the second attention layer (the top attention layer) performs multi-head attention over the output of the encoder stack. 2) Transformer based NMT variants: Due to the tremendous performance improvement by Transformer, related refinement has got huge attention for researchers. The well accepted weakness of vanilla Transformer includes: lacking of recurrence modeling, theoretically not Turing-complete, capturing position information, as well as large model complexity. All these drawbacks have hindered its further improvement of translation performance. In response to these problems, some adjustments have been proposed for getting a better model. In respect of model architecture, some proposed modifications focused on both in depth of attention layer and network composition. Bapna et al. has proposed 2-3x deeper Transformer with a refined attention mechanism, which can be easier for the optimization of deeper models BIB52074346 . The refined attention mechanism extended its connection to each encoder layers, like a weighted residual connections along the encoder depth, which allows the model to flexibly adjust the gradient flow to different layers of encoder. Similarly, Wang et al. BIB174799399 proposed a more deeper Transformer model (25 layers of encoder), which continues the same line of Bapna et al.(2018)'s work with properly applying layer normalization and a novel output combination method. In contrast to the fixed layers of NMT model, Dehghani et al. proposed Universal Transformers, which cancelled to stack the constant number of layers by combining recurrent inductive bias of RNNs and Adaptive Computation Time halting mechanism, thus enhanced the original self-attention based representation for better learning iterative or recursive transformations. Notably, this adjustment has made the model be shown to be Turing-complete under certain assumptions [142] . As for refinement in network composition, inspired by the thinking of AutoML, So et al. applied neural architecture search (NAS) to find a comparable model with simplified architecture BIB59523610 . The Evolved Transformer proposed in BIB59523610 has an innovative combination of basic blocks achieves the same quality as the original Transformer-Big model with 37.6% less parameters. While most modification is focus on changing model structure directly, some new literature has chosen to utilize different input representation to improve model performance. One direct method is using enhanced Position Encoding for sequence order injection, where vanilla Transformer has weakness in capturing position information. Shaw et al. proposed modified self-attention mechanism with awareness of utilizing representations of relative positions, which demonstrated to have a significant improvements in two MT tasks BIB3725815 . Concurrently, using pre-initialized input representation with fine tune is another orientation, where some attempt have been proposed in different NLP tasks such as applying ELMo BIB3626819 for encoder of NMT model BIB85500074 . In terms of Transformer, one by-product of this innovative model is using self-attention for representing sequence, which can effectively fused word information with contextual information. In later, Two wellknown Transformer based input representation methods were been proposed named Bert (Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Transformers) BIB52967399 and GPT (Generative Pretrained Transformer)  , which has been indicated to bring improvement in some downstream NLP tasks. As for applying Transformer based pre-trained model in NMT task, more recently, this kind of trying has also been realized by using Bert as additional embedding layer or applying Bert as pretrained model directly BIB203591420 , which has been indicated to provide a bit better performance than vanilla Transformer after fine tune. Additionally, directly applying Bert as pre-trained model has been proved to have similar performance and thus can be more convenient for encoder initialization. The full structure of Transformer is illustrated in Fig. 14. VII. FUTURE TREND Although we have witnessed the fast-growing research progresses in NMT, there are still many challenges. Based on the extensive investigation BIB8822680 [125] BIB59606205 [116], we summarize the major challenges and list some potential directions in the following several aspects. (1) In terms of translation performance, NMT still doesn't perform well in translating long sentences. This is mainly because of two reasons: the practical limitation in engineering and the learning ability of the model itself. For the first reason, some academic experiments have chosen to ignore part of the long sentence that exceeds the RNN length. But we do believe that it's not the same thing when NMT has been deployed in industrial applications. For the second reason, as research progresses, the model architecture would be more complicated. For example, Transformer model has applied innovative structure in its design which brought significant improvement in translation quality and speed BIB13756489 . We believe that more refinements in model structure would be proposed. As we all know that RNN based NMT takes its advantages in modeling sequence order but results in computational inefficiency. More future work would consider the trade off between these two aspects. (2) Alignment mechanism is essential for both SMT and NMT models. For the vast majority of NMT models, Attention Mechanism plays the functional role in the alignment task, while it arguably does broader work than conventional alignment models. We believe this advanced alignment method would still get attraction in future research, since powerful attention method can improve the model performance directly. Later research in attention mechanism would try to relieve the weakness in NMT such as interpretation ability BIB102350916 . (3) Vocabulary coverage problem has always affected most of the NMT models. The research trend in handling computation load of softmax operation would pursue. And we have also found new training strategy which supports large vocabulary size. Besides, research of NMT operating in subword or character level has also aroused in recent years, which provided additional solution beyond traditional scope. More importantly, solving sophisticated translation scenario such as informal spelling is also a hot spot. Current NMT model integrated with character-level network has alleviated this phenomenon. Future work should focus on handling all kinds of OOV words in a more flexible way. (4) Low-Resource Neural Machine Translation BIB167217367 is another hot spot in current NMT, which tries to solve the severe performance reduction when NMT model is trained with rare bilingual corpus. Since the aforementioned scenario happened commonly in practice where some seldom-used languages don't have enough data, we do believe this filed would be extended in further research. Multilingual translation method BIB6359641  is the commonly proposed method which incorporated multi-language pair of data to improve NMT performance. It may need more interpretation about the different results in choosing different language pairs. Besides, unsupervised method has utilized the additional dataset and provided pre-trained model. Further research could improve its effect and provide hybrid training strategy with traditional method BIB5758868 [123] BIB3515219 . (5) Finally, research in NMT applications would also become more abundant. Currently, many applications have been developed such as speech translation [107] BIB7857444 and document level translation BIB9768369 . We believe that various applications (especially end-to-end tasks) would emerge in the future. We strongly hope that an AI based simultaneous translation system could be applied in large-scale, which can bring huge benefit to our human society BIB2782776 .