Transformer is a new NMT structure proposed by Vaswani et al. BIB13756489 . Different from existing NMT models, it has abandoned the standard RNN/CNN structures and designed an innovative multi-layer self-attention blocks that are incorporated with a positional encoding method. This new trend of structure design takes the advantages from both RNN and CNN based model, which has been further used for initializing the input representation for other NLP tasks. Notably, Transformer is a complete Attention based NMT model. 1) Structure of the model: Transformer has its distinct structure in its model, where the major differences are the input representation and multi-head attention. (1) Input representation Transformer has its unique representation in handling input data that quite different with recurrent or convolution model. For computing Self-Attention we mentioned, transformer handles the input as three kind of vectors for different purpose. They are Key,Value and Query vectors. And all these vectors are driven by multiplying the input embedding with three matrices that we trained during the training process. Also, there's Positional Encoding method was applied for enhancing the modeling ability of sequence order, since Transformer has abandoned recurrence structure, this kind of method made a compensation by inject word order information in to feature vector, which can avoid the model to become invariant to sequence ordering BIB8495258 . Specifically, Transformer add Positional Encoding to the input embedding at the bottoms of the encoder and decoder stacks, the Positional Encoding has been designed to have the same dimension with model embedding and thus could be summed. Positional Encoding can be calculated by applying positional functions directly or be learned BIB3648736 , with be proven to have similar performance in final evaluation. In Transformer, adding Positional Encoding by using since and cosine functions is finally chosen, and each position can be encoded in the following way: P E (pos,2i) = sin pos/10000 2i/dmodel ) P E (pos, 2i+1) = cos pos/10000 2i/dmodel BIB2479536 where pos indicates the position and i indicates the dimension. That is, each dimension of the positional encoding corresponds to a sinusoid function, and the wavelengths form a geometric progression from 2π to 20000π. The reason of choosing these functions is that they have been assumed theoretically in helping the model to learn to attend by relative positions easily, due to the characters that for any fixed offset k, P E pos + k can be represented as a linear function of P E pos . (2) Multi-head Self-Attention Self-Attention is the major innovation in Transformer. But in implementation, rather than just computing the Self-Attention once, the multi-head mechanism runs through the scaled dotproduct attention multiple times in parallel, and the outputs of these independent attention are then concatenated and linearly transformed into the expected dimensions. This multiple times Self-Attention computation is called Multi-head Self-Attention, which is applied for allowing the model to jointly attend to information from different representation sub-spaces at different positions. (