There are many variants in the implementation of Attention Mechanism. Here we just give the detailed description of Attention Mechanism which has been widely accepted as bringing significant contribution in the development of NMT. 1) basic structure: The structure of attention mechanism was originally proposed by Bahdanau et al. In later, Luong et al. proposed similar structure with small distinctions and extends this work BIB1998416 BIB11212020 . To simplify the discussion, here we take Luong et al.'s method as an example. Concretely, in encoding period, this mechanism receiving the input words like the basic NMT model, but instead of compressing all the information in one vector, every unit in the top layer of encoder will generate one vector that represents one time-step in the source sentence. In the decoding period, the decoder wont predict the word just use its own information. However, it collaborates with the attention layer to get the translation. The input of attention mechanism is the hidden states in the top layer of the encoder and the current decoder. It gets the relativity order by calculating the following steps: 1. The current decoding hidden state h t will be used to compare with all source states h s to derive the attention weights score s t . 2. The attention weights a t is driven by normalization operation for all attention weight score. 3. Based on the attention weights, we then compute the weighted average of the source states as a context vector c t . 4. Concatenate the context vector with the current decoding hidden state to yield the final attention vector(the exact combination method can be different). 5. The attention vector is fed as an input to decoder in the next time-step (applicable for input feeding). The first three steps can be summarized by the equations below: Among the above function, The score function could be defined in different ways. Here, we two classic definitions: Back to the decoding period, it receives the information from both two sides, the decoder hidden state and the attention vector, given the current two vectors, it then predicts the words by alignment them to a new vector, then it usually has another layer to predict the current target word.