The inspiration for neural machine translation comes from two aspects: the success of Deep Learning in other NLP tasks as we mentioned, and the unresolved problems in the development of MT itself. For the first reason, in many NLP tasks, traditional Machine Learning method is highly dependent on hand-crafted features that often come from linguistic intuition, which is definitely an empirical trial-and-error process BIB351666  and is often far more incomplete in representing the nature of original data. For example, the context size of training language model is assigned by researchers with strong assumption in context relation BIB8264008 ; and in text representation method, the classic bag-of-words (BOW) method has ignored the influence of word order BIB1174898 . However, when applying deep neural network (DNN) in the aforementioned tasks, the DNN requires minimum domain-knowledge and avoids some pre-processing steps in human feature engineering BIB2201909 . DNN is a powerful neural network which has achieved excellent performance in many complex learning tasks which are traditionally considered difficult BIB207763512  . In NLP field, DNN has been applied in some traditional tasks, for example, speech recognition BIB453615 and Named Entity Recognition (NER) BIB351666 . With the exceptional performance they got, DNN-based models have found many potential applications in other NLP tasks. For the second reason, in MT field, PBSMT has got a pretty good performance in the past decades, but there are still some inherent weaknesses which require further improvement. First, since the PBSMT generates the translation by segmenting the source sentence into several phrases and doing phrase replacement, it may ignore the long dependency beyond the length of phrases and thus cause inconsistency in translation results such as incorrect gender agreements. Second, there are generally many intricate sub-components in current systems BIB2479536 [14] BIB11509296 , e.g., language model, reordering model, length/unknown penalties, etc. With the increasing number of these sub-components, it is hard to fine-tune and combine each other to get a more stable result BIB1998416 . All the above discussions have indicated the bottleneck in the development of SMT miniature. Specifically, this bottleneck mainly comes from the language model (LM). This is because, in MT task, language model actually can give the most important information: the emergence probability of a particular word (or phrase) that is conditioned on previous words. So building a better LM can definitely improve the translation performance. The vast majority of conventional LM is based on the Markov assumption: where x 1 , x 2 , ..., x T is a sequence of words in a sentence and T represents the length of the sentence. In this assumption, the probability of the sentence is equal to the multiplication of probability of each word. n is the total number of words that is chosen to simplify the model, which is also referred to as context window. Obviously, the dependency of words that exceed n would be ignored, which implies that the conventional LM performs poorly on modeling long dependency. Moreover, since the experimental result has indicated that a modest context size (generally 4-6 words) can be accepted, the first problem of traditional LM is the limited representation ability. Besides, the data sparsity for training has always been the problem that hinders an LM built with a larger size of context window. This is because the number of n-tuples for counting is exponential in n. In other words, when building an LM, with the increment of the number of order, the number of training samples we need would also increase remarkably, which is also referred to as "curse of dimensionality". For example, if one LM has the order of 5 with a vocabulary size of 10,000, then the possible combination of words for statistics should be about 10 25 , which requires enormous training data. And since most of these combinations have not been observed before, subsequent researches have used various trade-off and smoothing method to alleviate the sparsity problem BIB1541597 [128]  [130]  . While further research of the aforementioned LM with statistical method has become almost stagnant, Neural Language Model (NLM) BIB2852525 , on the other hand, uses a neural network to build a language model that models text data directly. In initial stage, NLM used fixed-length of a feature vector to represent each word, and then the solid number of word vectors would concatenate together as a semantic metric to represent the context BIB2852525 [38] BIB207041403 , which is very similar to the context window. This work was enhanced later by injecting additional context information from source sentence BIB7417943 [132] BIB8608051 . Comparing with the traditional LM, the original NLM alleviates the sample sparsity due to the distributed representation of the word, which enables them to share the statistical weights rather than being independent variables. And since words with similar meaning may occur in the similar context, the corresponding feature vector would have the similar value, which indicates that the semantic relation of words has been "embedded" into the feature vector. New proposals in the next stage solve the long dependency problem by using Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). RNN based NLM (RNLM) models the whole sentence by reading each word once a time-step, thus it can model the true conditional probability without limitation of context size BIB17048224 . Before the emergence of NMT, the RNLM, as mentioned earlier, outperformed the conventional LM in the evaluation of text perplexity and brought better performance in many practical tasks BIB17048224 BIB5201925 . The direct application of NLM in SMT has been naturally proposed BIB7417943 [36] BIB5467830 [40] BIB3065236 , and the preliminary experiment indicated promising results. The potential of NLM motivates further exploration for a complete DNN based translation model. Subsequently, a more "pure" model with the only neural network has emerged, with the DNN architecture that learns to do the translation task end-to-end. Section III demonstrates its basic structure (in Fig. 4 ), as well as its concrete details. 2) Formulation of NMT Task: Currently, NMT task is originally designed as an end-to-end learning task. It directly processes a source sequence to a target sequence. The learning objective is to find the correct target sequence given the source sequence, which can be seen as a high dimensional classification problem that tries to map the two sentences in the semantic space. In all mainstreams of modern NMT model, this process can be divided into two steps: encoding and decoding, and thus can functionally separate the whole model as Encoder and Decoder as illustrated in Fig. 2 . Fig. 2 . End-to-End structure in modern NMT model. The encoder is used to represent the source sentence to semantic vector, while the decoder makes prediction from this semantic vector to a target sentence. End-to-End means the model processes source data to target data directly, without explicable intermediate result. In perspective of probability, NMT generates the target sequence T (t 1 , t 2 , ..., t m ) from the max conditional probability given the source sequence S(s 1 , s 2 , ..., s n ), where n is the length of sequence S and m is the length of target sequence T . The whole task could be formulated as BIB3603249 : argmax P (T |S). ( More concretely, when generating each word of the target sentence, it uses the information from both the word it predicted previously and the source sentence. In that case, each generating step could be described as when generating the i-th word: Based on this formula and the discussion of NLM above, NMT task could be regarded as an NLM model with additional constraints (e.g., conditioned on a given source sequence).