While the promising performance of NMT has indicated its great potential in capturing the dependencies inside the sequence, in practice, NMT still suffers a huge performance reduction when the source sentence becomes too long. Comparing with other feature extractors, the major weakness of the original NMT Encoder is that it has to compress one sentence into a fixed-length vector. When the input sentence becomes longer, the performance deteriorates because the final output of the network is a fixed-length vector, which may have limitation in representing the whole sentence and cause some information loss. And because of the limited length of vector, this information loss usually covers the long-range dependencies of words. While increasing the dimension of encoding vector is an intuitive solution, since the RNN training speed is naturally slow, a larger vector size would cause an even worse situation. Attention Mechanism emerged under this circumstance. Bahdanau et al. BIB11212020 initially used this method as a supplement that can provide additional word alignment information in the decoding process, thus can alleviate the information reduction when the input sentence is too long. Concretely, Attention Mechanism is an intermediate component between Encoder and Decoder, which can help to determine the word correlation (word alignment information) dynamically. In the encoding period, it extends the vector of the final state in the original NMT model with a weighted average of hidden state in each time state, and a score function is provided to get the weight we mention above by calculating the correlation of each word in source sentence with the current predicting word. Thus the decoder could adapt its concentration in different translation steps by ordering the importance of each word correlation in source sentence, and this method can help to capture the longrange dependencies for each word respectively. The inspiration for applying the Attention Mechanism on NMT comes from human behavior in reading and translating the text data. People generally read text repeatedly for mining the dependency within the sentence, which means each word has different dependency weight with each other. Comparing with other models in capturing word dependency information such as pooling layer in CNN or N-gram language model, attention mechanism has a global scope. When finding the dependency in one sequence, N -gram model will fix its the searching scope in a small range, usually the N is equal to 2 or 3 in practice. Attention Mechanism, on the other hand, calculates the dependency between the current generating word with other words in source sentence. This more flexible method obviously bring a better result. The practical application of Attention Mechanism is actually far beyond the NMT field, and it is even not an invention in NMT development. Some other tasks have also proposed similar methods that give weighted concentration on different position of input data, for example, Xu et al [109] . proposed similar mechanism in handling image caption task, which can helps to dynamically locate different entries in image feature vector when generating description of them. Due to the scope of this survey, the following discussion would only focus on the Attention Mechanism in NMT.