Before feeding the training data to the model, one pre-step is to transfer the words to vectors, which makes a proper form that the neural network could receive. Usually, the most frequent V words in one language will be chosen, and each language generally has different word set. Despite that the embedding weights will be learned in the training period, the pre-trained word embedding vector such as word2vec BIB5959482 BIB7478738 or Glove vector BIB1957433 can also be applied directly. In the training period, this model is fed by a bilingual corpus for Encoder and Decoder. The learning objective is to map the input sequence with the corresponding sequence in the target language correctly. Like other DNN models, the input sentence pair is embedded as a list of word vectors, and the model parameters are initialized randomly. The training process could be formulated as trying to updating its parameters periodically until getting the minimum loss of the neural network. In the implementation, RNN will refine the parameters after it processes a subset of data that contain a batch of training samples; this subset is called the mini-batch set. To simplify the discussion of the training process, we take one sentence pair (one training sample) as example. For the Encoder, the encoding RNN will receive one word in source sentence once a time-step. After several steps, all words will be compressed into the hidden state of the Encoder. Then the final vector will be transferred to the Decoder. For Decoder, the input comes from two sources: the thought vector that is directly sent to Decoder, and the correct word in the last time-step (the first word is < EOS >). The output process in Decoder can be seen as a reverse work of Encoder; Decoder predicts one word in each time-step until the last symbol is < EOS >.