Based on the scenario as mentioned above, in the practical implementation of NMT, the initial way is choosing a small set of vocabulary and converting a large number of OOV words to one uniform "UNK" symbol (or other tags) as illustrated in Fig. 10 . This intuitive solution may hurt translation performance in the following two aspects. First, the existence of "UNK" symbol in translation may hurt the semantic completeness of sentence; ambiguity may emerge when "UNK" replace some crucial words BIB969555 . Second, as the NMT model hard to learn information from OOV words, the prediction quality beyond the OOV words may also be affected BIB17801406 . Besides the unsurprising observation that NMT performed poorly on sentence with more OOV words than with more frequent words, some other phenomena in MT task are also hard to be handled like multi-word alignment, transliteration, and spelling, .etc. BIB7961699 BIB11212020 . They are seen as a similar phenomenon which is also caused by unknown words problem or suffers from rare training data BIB1114678 . Fig. 10 . An example of OOV words problem presented in BIB1998416 . en and f r denote the source sentence in English and the corresponding target sentence in French, nn denotes the neural network's result. For most of NMT model, choosing a modest size of vocabulary list is virtually a trade-off between the computation cost with translation quality. Also, it has been found the same thing in training NLM  BIB10097073 . Concretely, the computation cost mainly comes from the nature of the method in getting predicting word a normalization operation, which is used repeatedly in training of the DL model. Specifically, in NMT task, since DL model needs to adjust the parameters each time, the probability of current word thus would be calculated repeatedly to get the gradient, and since NMT model calculates the probability of current word when making a prediction, it needs to normalize the all of words in the vocabulary each time. Unfortunately, the normalization process is timeconsuming due to its time complexity is linear with the vocabulary size, and this attribute has rendered the same time complexity in the training process.