GNMT is short for Google Neural Machine Translation, which is a well-known version of NMT with Attention Mechanism. GNMT was proposed by Wu et al., BIB3603249 and famous for its successful application in industrial level NMT system. With the help of many kinds of advanced tips in model detail, it got state-of-the- Fig. 6 . The concept of Global attention, current decoder hidden state calculated with all the hidden states in source side to get the alignment information. art performance at that time. Besides, the elaborate architecture of GNMT makes it have a better inference speed, which helps it more applicable in satisfying the industry need. The concept of GNMT get the help of the current research in attention mechanism; it used Global Attention but was reconstruct by a more effective structure for model parallelization. The concrete details illustrated in the figure, it has two main points in this architecture. First, this structure has canceled the Fig. 8 . Attention in GNMT, the Attention weight was driven by the bottom layer of Decoder and sent to all Decoder layers, which helps to improve computing parallelization connection between the encoder and the decoder. So that it can have more freedom in choosing the structure of the encoder and decoder, for example, the encoder could choose the different dimensions in each layer regardless of the dimension in the decoder, only the top layer of the both encoder and decoder should have same dimensions to guarantee that they can be calculated in mathematics for driving attention vector. Second, this structure makes it easier for paralleling the model. Only the bottom layer of the decoder is used to get the context vector, then all of the remain decoding layers will use this context vector directly. This architecture can retain as much parallelism as possible. For details of attention calculation, GNMT applying the Attention Mechanism like the way of calculating global attention, while the score() function is a feed forward network with 1 hidden layer. 5) Self-attention: Self-attention is also called intraattention, it is wildly known for its application in NMT task due to the emergence of Transformer. While other commonly Fig. 9 . The concept of Multi-head Self-attention noted Attention Mechanism driven the context information by calculating words dependency between source sequence with target sequence, Self-attention calculates the words dependency inside the sequence, and thus get an attention based sequence representation. As for calculation steps, Self-attention first gets 3 vectors based original embedding for different purpose, the 3 vectors are Query vector, Key vector, and Value vector. Then the attention weights was calculated in this way: is a scaled factor for avoiding to have more stable gradients that caused by dot products operation. In addition, the above calculation can be implemented in metrics multiplication, so the words dependency can easily got in form of relation metrics.