Global Attention is the method of Attention Mechanism we mentioned above, and its also a fluent type in various of Attention mechanism. The idea of Global Attention is also the original form of attention mechanism, though it got this name by Luong et al. BIB1998416 , the corresponding term is Local Attention. The term global derives from it calculates the context vector by considering the relevance order of all words in the source sentence. This method has excellent performance because more alignment information will generally produce a better result. A straightforward presentation in Fig. 6 As we have introduced in Section IV, this method considers all the source word in the decoding period. The main drawback is calculation speed deteriorates when the sequence is very long since one hidden state will be generated in one time-step in the Encoder, the cost of score function would be linear with the number of time-steps on the Encoder. When the input is a long sequence like a compound sentence or a paragraph, it may affect the decoding speed. Local attention Local attention was first proposed by Luong et al. BIB1998416 . As illustrated in Fig. 7 , this model, on the other hand, will just calculate the relevance with a subset of the source sentence. Comparing with Global attention, it fixes the length of attention vector by giving a scope number, thus avoiding the expensive computation in getting context vectors. The experiment result indicated that local attention can keep a balance between model performance with computing speed. The inspiration of local attention comes from the soft attention and hard attention in image caption generation task, which was proposed by Xu et al. [109] . While the global attention is very similar to soft attention, the local attention, on the other hand, can be seen as a mixture method of soft attention with hard attention. In theory, although covering more information would generally get a better result, the fantastic result of this method has indicated a comparable performance with global attention when it has been fine-tuned. This seems due to the common phenomenon in human language the current word would naturally have a high dependency with some of its nearby words, which is quite similar to the assumption of the n-gram language model. In the details of calculation process, given the current target words position p t , the model fixes the context vector in scope D. The context vector ct is then derived as a weighted average over the set of source hidden states within the range [p t − D, p t + D]; Scope D is selected by experience, and then it could be same steps in deriving the attention vector like Global attention. 3) Input feeding approach: Input feeding is a small tip in constructing the NMT structure, but from the perspective of providing alignment information, it can also be seen as a kind of attention. The concept of input feeding is simple. In the decoding period, besides using the previously predicted words as input, it also uses the attention vector that in the previous time-step as additional input in next time-step [1] BIB1998416 . This attention vectors will concatenate with input vector to get the final input vector; then this new vector will be fed as the input in the next step.