Translation is the first design in MT, which is based on the hypothesis that all different languages have its symbol in representing the same meaning. Because in usual, a word in one language could find its corresponding word in another language with the same meaning. In this method, the translation process could be treated as the word replacement in the source sentence. In terms of 'rule-based', since different languages could represent the same meaning of sentence in different word order, the word replacement method should base on the syntax rules of both two languages. Thus every word in the source sentence should take its corresponding position in the target language. The rule-based method has a beautiful theory but hardly achieves satisfactory performance in implementation. This is because of the computational inefficiency in determining the adaptive rule of one sentence. Besides, grammar rules are also hard to be organized, since linguists summarize the grammar rules, and there are too many syntax rules in one language (especially language with more relaxed grammar rules). It is even possible that two syntax rules conflict with each other. The most severe drawback of rule-based method is that it has ignored the need of context information in the translation process, which destroys the robustness of rule-based machine translation. One famous example was given by Marvin Minsky in 1966, where he used two sentences given below: "T he pen is in the box" "T he box is in the pen" Both sentences have the same syntax structure. The first sentence is easy to understand; but the second one is more confusing, since the word "pen" is a polysemant, which also means "fence" in English. But it is difficult for the computer to translate the "pen" to that meaning; the word replacement is thus an unsuccessful method. 2) Statistical Machine Translation: Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) has been the mainstream technology for the past 20 years. It has been successfully applied in the industry, including Google translation, Baidu translation, etc. Different from Rule-based machine translation, SMT tackles the translation task from a statistical perspective. Concretely, the SMT model finds the words (or phrases) which have the same meaning through bilingual corpus by statistics. Given one sentence, SMT divides it into several sub-sentences, then every part could be replaced by target word or phrase. The most prevalent version of SMT is Phrase-based SMT (PBSMT), which in general includes pre-processing, sentence alignment, word alignment, phrase extraction, phrase feature preparation, and language model training. The key component of a PBSMT model is a phrase-based lexicon, which pairs phrases in the source language with phrases in the target language. The lexicon is built from the training data set which is a bilingual corpus. By using phrases in this translation, the translation model could utilize the context information within phrases. Thus PBSMT could outperform the simple word-toword translation methods. 3) Neural Machine Translation: It has been a long time since the first try on MT task by neural network  BIB60590857 . Because of the poor performance in the early period and the computing hardware limitation, related research in translation by neural network has been ignored for many years. Due to the proliferation of Deep Learning in 2010, more and more NLP tasks have achieved great improvement. Using deep neural networks for MT task has received great attention as well. A successful DNN based Machine Translation (NMT) model was first proposed by Kalchbrenner and Blunsom BIB12639289 , which is a totally new concept for MT by that time. Comparing with other models, the NMT model needs less linguistic knowledge but can produce a competitive performance. Since then, many researchers have reported that NMT can perform much better than the traditional SMT model BIB16538528 [112]  [114] BIB13858533 , and it has also been massively applied to the industrial field BIB3603249 .