ConvS2S is short for Convolutional Sequence to Sequence, which is an end-to-end NMT model proposed by Gehring et al. BIB3648736 . Different with most of RNN based NMT models, ConvS2S is entirely CNN based model both in encoder and decoder. In the network structure, ConvS2S stacked 15 layers of CNN in its encoder and decoder with fixed kernel width of 3. This deep structure helps to mitigate the weakness in capturing context information. In respect of network details, ConvS2S applied Gated Linear Units (GLU) BIB16119010 in building network, which provide a gated function for output of convolution layer. Specifically, the output of convolution layer Y ∈ R 2d which is a vector with double times dimensions (2d numbers of dimensions) of each input element's embedding (d numbers of dimensions), the gated function processes the output Y = [AB] ∈ R 2d by implementing the equation 8, where both A and B are d dimensions vector, and the function σ(B) is a gated function used to control which inputs A of the current context are relevant. This non-linearity operation has been proved to be more effective in applying training language model BIB16119010 , surpassing those only applying tanh function on A BIB8142135 . In addition, ConvS2S also used residual connection BIB206594692 between different convolution layers.  Besides the innovation of CNN based encoder-decoder structure, ConvS2S also applied similar Attention Mechanism that has been wildly accepted by RNN model, called Multistep Attention. Concretely, Multi-step Attention is a separate attention structure applied in each decoder layer. In the process of calculating attention, the current hidden state d l i (i.e., the output of the lth layer) has combined with previous output embedding g i as a vector of decoder state summary d l i : Then the attention vector a l ij (i.e., the attention of state i with source element j in decoder layer l) would be driven by the dot-product of the summary vector with the output of the final encoder layer z u j . Lastly, the context vector is calculated as the weighted average of the attention vector a l ij with the encoder output z u j as well as the encoder input e j . . This model has directly inherited the structure of GNMT model that was proposed by Wu et al. BIB3603249 . Specifically, RNMT+ can be seen as an enhanced GNMT model, which demonstrated the best performance of RNN based NMT model. In model structure, RNMT+ mainly differs from the GNMT model in the following several perspectives: First, RNMT+ used six bi-directional RNN (LSTM) in its decoder, whereas GNMT used one layer of bi-directional RNN with seven layers of unidirectional RNN. This structure has sacrificed the computation efficiency in return for the extreme performance. Second, RNMT+ applied Multi-head additive attention instead of the single-head attention in conventional NMT model, which can be seen as taking advantage of Transformer model. Third, synchronous training strategy was provided in the training process, which improved the convergence speed with model performance based on empirical results BIB593493 . In addition, inspired by Transformer model, per-gate layer normalization [101] was applied, which has indicated to be helpful in stabilizing model training. Fig. 13 . The structure of RNMT+ model,which has the similar structure of GNMT with adaptive innovation in Attention Mechanism