As is known, Encoder-Decoder is the most original and classic structure of NMT; it was directly inspired by NLM and proposed by Kalchbrenner & Blunsom BIB12639289 and Cho et al. BIB5590763 . Despite all kinds of refinements in details and small tips, it was wildly accepted by almost all modern NMT models. Based on the discussion above, since RNN based NMT has held the dominant position in NMT, and to avoid being overwhelmed in describing all kinds of small distinctions between models' structures, we specifically focus our discussion just on the vanilla RNN based NMT, thus can help to trace back the development process of NMT. The original structure of Encoder-Decoder structure is conceptually simple. It contains two connected networks (the encoder and the decoder) in its architecture, each for a different part of the translation process. When the encoder network receives one source sentence, it reads the source sentence word by word and compresses the variable-length sequence into a fixed-length vector in each hidden state. This process is called encoding. Then given the final hidden state of the encoder (referred to as thought vector), the decoder does the reverse work by transforming the thought vector to the target sentence word by word. Because Encoder-Decoder structure addresses the translation task from source data directly to the target result, which means there's no visible result in the middle process, this is also called end-to-end translation. The principle of Encoder-Decoder structure of NMT can be seen as mapping the source sentence with the target sentence via an intermediate vector in semantic space. This intermediate vector actually can represent the same semantic meaning in both two languages. For specific details of this structure, besides the model selection in the network, RNN based NMT models also differ in three main terms: (a) the directionality; (b) the type of activation function; and (c) the depth of RNN layer  . In the following, we give a detailed description. Depth: For the depth of RNN, as we discussed in Section II, single layer RNN usually performs poorly comparing with multi-layer RNN. In recent years, almost all the models with competitive performance are using a deep network, which has indicated a trend of using a deeper model to get the stateof-the-art result. For example, Bahdanau et al. BIB11212020 used four layers RNN in their model. However, simply increasing more layers of RNN may not always be useful. In the proof proposed by Britz et al. BIB2201909 , they found that using 4 layers RNN in the encoder for specific dataset would produce the best performance when there is no other auxiliary method in the whole model. Besides that, stacking RNN layers may make the network become too slow and difficult to train. One major challenges is the gradient exploding and vanishing problem BIB206457500 , which will cause the gradient be amplified or diminished when processing back propagation in deep layers. Besides the additional gate structure in refined RNN (like LSTM and GRU), other methods have also been applied to alleviate this phenomenon. For example, in Wu et al.'s work, the residual connections are provided between layer, which can improve the value of gradient flow in the backward pass, thus can speed up the convergence process BIB3603249 . Another possible problem is that a deeper model often indicates larger model capacity, which may perform worse on comparatively less training data due to the over-fitting. Directionality: In respect of directionality, a simple unidirectional RNN has been chosen by some researchers. For example, Luong et al. have directly used unidirectional RNN to accept the input sentence BIB1998416 . In comparison, bidirectional RNN is another common choice that can empower the translation quality. This is because the model performance is affected by whether it 'knows' well about the information in context word when predicting current word. A bidirectional RNN obviously could strengthen this ability. In practice, both Bahdanau et al. and Wu et al. used bidirectional RNN on the bottom layer as an alternative to capture the context information BIB11212020 BIB3603249 . In this structure, the first layer reads the sentence "left to right", and the second layer reads the sentence in a reverse direction. Then they are concatenated and fed to the next layer. This method generally has a better performance in experiment, although the explanation is intuitive: Based on the discussion of LM in Section II, the emergence probability of a specific word is determined by all the other words in both the prior and the post positions. When applying unidirectional RNN, word dependency between the first word and the last word is hard to be captured by the thought vector, since the model has experienced too many states in all time steps. On the country, bidirectional RNN provides an additional layer of information with reverse direction of reading words, which could naturally reduce this relative length within steps. The most visible drawback of this method is that it's hard to be paralleled, considering the time-consuming in its realization, both Bahdanau et al. and Wu et al. choose to apply just one layer bidirectional RNN in the bottom layer of the encoder, and other layers are all unidirectional layers BIB3603249 BIB11212020 . This choice makes a trade-off between the feature representation ability with model efficiency, due to it can still enable the model to be distributed on multi GPUs BIB3603249 . The basic concept of bidirectional RNN could find in Fig. 2 . Activation Function Selection: In respect of activation function selection, there are three common choices: vanilla RNN, Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) BIB1915014 , and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) BIB5590763 . Comparing with the vanilla RNN, both the last two have some robustness in addessing the gradient exploding and vanishing problem BIB7386147 BIB206457500 . Another sequence processing task has also indicated better performance achieved by GRU and LSTM BIB5201925 . Besides, some innovative neural units have been proposed. Wang et al. proposed linear associative units, which can alleviate the gradient diffusion phenomenon in non-linear recurrent activation BIB22973057 . More recently, Zhang et al. have created addition-subtraction twingated recurrent network (ATR). This type of unit reduces the inefficiency in NMT training and inference by simplifying the weight matrices among units BIB53083789 . All in all, in NMT task, LSTM is the most common choice.