There are many variations of network design for NMT, which can be categorized into recurrent or non − recurrent models. More specifically, this category can be traced back to the early development of NMT, when RNN and CNN based models are the most common design. Many sophisticated models proposed afterwards also belong to either CNN or RNN family. This sub-section follows the development of NMT in the early years, and demonstrates some representative models by classifying them as RNN or CNN based models. 1) RNN based NMT: Although in theory, any network with enough feature extraction ability could be selected to build an NMT model, in def acto implementations, RNN based NMT models have taken the dominant position in NMT development, and they have achieved state-of-the-art performance. Based on the discussion in Section II, since many NLM literature used RNN to model the sequence data, this design has intuitively motivated the further work to build an RNN based NMT model. In the initial experiment, an RNN based NLM was applied as a feature extractor to compress the source sentence into a feature vector, which is also referred to as thought vector. Then a similar RNN was applied to do the 'inverse work' to find the target sentence that can match the previous thought vector in semantic space. The first successful RNN based NMT was proposed by Sutskever et al., who used a pure deep RNN model and got a performance that approximates the best result achieved by SMT BIB7961699 . Further development proposed the Attention Mechanism, which improves the translation performance significantly and exceeds the best SMT model. GNMT model was an industry-level model applied in Google Translation, and it was regarded as a milestone in RNN based NMT. Besides the above mentioned work, other researchers have also proposed different architectures with excellent performance. Zhang et al. proposed Variational NMT method, which has an innovative perspective in modeling translation task, and the corresponding experiment has indicated a better performance than the baseline of original NMT in Chinese-English and English-German tasks BIB9134916 . Zhou et al. have designed Fast-Forward Connections for RNN (LSTM), which can allow a deeper network in implementation and thus gets a better performance BIB8586038 . Shazeer et al. incorporated Mixtureof-Expert (MoE) architecture into the GNMT model, which has outperformed the original GNMT model BIB12462234 . Concretely, MoE is one layer in the NMT model, which contains many sparsely combined experts (which are feed-forward neural networks in this experiment) and is connected with the RNN layer by a gate function. This method requires more parameters in total for the NMT model, but still maintains the efficiency in training speed. Since more parameters often imply a better representation ability, it demonstrates huge potential in the future. 2) CNN based NMT: Related work in trying other DNN models have also been proposed. Perhaps the most noted one is the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based NMT. In fact, CNN based models have also undergone many variations in its concrete architecture. But for a long while, most of these models can't have competitive performance with RNN based model, especially when the Attention Mechanism has emerged. In the development of CNN based NMT models, Kalchbrenner & Blunsom once tried a CNN encoder with RNN Decoder BIB12639289 , and it's maybe the earliest NMT architecture applied with CNN. Cho et al. tried a gated recursive CNN encoder with RNN decoder, but it has shown worse performance than RNN encoder BIB5590763 . A fully CNN based NMT was proposed by Kaiser & Bengio later BIB11250862 , which applied Extended Neural GPU BIB2009318 . The best performance in the early period of CNN based NMT was achieved by Gehring et al., which was a CNN encoder NMT and got the similar translation performance with RNN based model at that time BIB6728280 . Concurrently, Kalchbrenner et al. also proposed ByteNet (a kind of CNN) based NMT, which achieved the state-ofthe-art performance on character-level translation but failed at word-level translation BIB13895969 . In addition, Meng et al. and Tu et al. proposed a CNN based model separately, which provides additional alignment information for SMT BIB447679  . Compared with RNN based NMT, CNN based models have its advantage in training speed; this is due to the intrinsic structure of CNN which allows parallel computations for its different filters when handling the input data. And also, the model structure has made CNN based models easier to resolve the gradient vanishing problem. However, there are two fatal drawbacks that affect their translation quality. First, since the original CNN based model can only capture the word depen-dencies within the width of its filters, the long dependency of words can only be found in high-level convolution layers; this unnatural character often causes a worse performance than the RNN based model. Second, since the original NMT model compresses a sentence into a fixed size of the vector, a large performance reduction would happen when the sentence becomes too long. This comes from the limited representation ability in fixed size of the vector. Similar phenomenon can also be found in early proposed RNN based models, which are later alleviated by Attention Mechanism. Some advanced CNN based NMT models have also been proposed with corresponding solutions in addressing the above drawbacks. Kaiser BIB3508167 . BIB3648736 followed their previous work by proposing a CNN based NMT that is cooperated with Attention Mechanism. It even got a better result than RNN based model BIB3648736 , but this achievement was soon outperformed by Transformer BIB13756489 .