Since the traditional SMT model with NLM has got the state-of-the-art performance at that time, a pure DNN based translation approach was proposed later with an end-to-end design to model the entire MT process BIB12639289 BIB7961699 . Using DNN based NMT could capture subtle irregularities in both two languages more efficiently BIB3603249 , which is similar to the observation that DNNs often have a better performance than 'shallow' neural networks BIB11212020 . NMT with Attention Mechanism Although the initial DNN based NMT model has not outperformed the SMT completely, it still exhibited a huge potential for further research. When tracing back the major weakness, although one theoretical advantage of RNN is its ability in capturing the long dependency between words, in fact, the model performance would deteriorate with the increase of sentence length. This scenario is due to the limited feature representation ability in a fixed-length vector. Under the circumstances, since the original NMT has got a pretty good performance without any auxiliary, the idea of whether some variants in architecture could bring a breakthrough has led to the rise of Attention Mechanism. Attention Mechanism was originally proposed by Bahdanau et al. as an intermediate component BIB11212020 , and the objective is to provide additional word alignment information in translating the long sentence. Surprisingly, NMT model has got a considerable improvement with the help of this simple method. Later on, with tremendous popularity among both academia and industry, many refinements in Attention Mechanism have emerged, and more details will be discussed in Section IV. Fully Attention based NMT With the development of Attention Mechanism, fully Attention-based NMT has emerged as a great innovation in NMT history. In this new tendency, Attention mechanism has taken the dominate position in text feature extraction rather than a auxiliary component. And the representative model is Transformer BIB13756489 , which is a fully attention-based model proposed by Vaswani et al. Abandoning previous framework in neither RNN nor CNN based NMT models, Transformer is a that solely based on an intensified version of Attention Mechanism called Self-Attention with feed-forward connection, which got revolutionary progress in structure with state-of-the-art performance. Specifically, the innovative attention structure is the secret sauce to gain such significant improvement. The self-attention is a powerful feature extractor which also allows to 'read' the entire sentence and model it once a time. In the perspective of model architecture, this character can be seen as a combination of advantages from both CNN and RNN, which endows it a good feature representation ability with high inference speed. More details about self-attention will be given in Section IV. The architecture of Transformer will be discussed in Section VI.