Case 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 19 Filed 03/28/2006 Page 1 of 3

1

2

3

4

5

**E-filed 3/27/06**

6

7

8

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

9

FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA

10

SAN JOSE DIVISION

11

12 Michael Angelo MORALES,

Case Number C 06 219 JF RS Case Number C 06 926 JF RS

13

Plaintiff,

DEATH-PENALTY CASE

14

v.

ORDER DENYING MOTION TO

15 Jeanne S. WOODFORD, Acting Secretary of the California Department of Corrections and

CONSOLIDATE WITHOUT PREJUDICE

16 Rehabilitation; Steven W. Ornoski, Acting Warden of San Quentin State Prison; and Does 1-50,

17 Defendants.

18 PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE,

Case Number C 06 1793 JF RS

19

Plaintiff,

DEATH-PENALTY CASE

20 v.

ORDER DENYING MOTION TO

21 Jeanne S. WOODFORD, Acting Secretary of the

CONSOLIDATE WITHOUT PREJUDICE

22 California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation; Steven W. Ornoski, Acting Warden

23 of San Quentin State Prison; and Does 1-50,

24

Defendants.

[Docket No. 4]

25

26

On January 13, 2006, Plaintiff Michael Angelo Morales filed an action, Morales v.

27 Woodford, No. C 06 219 JF RS, challenging California’s lethal-injection protocol as violating the

28 Eighth Amendment; on February 10, 2006, he filed a second action, Morales v. Woodford, No. C

Case Nos. C 06 219 JF RS, C 06 926 JF RS & C 06 1793 JF RS ORDER DENYING WITHOUT PREJUDICE MOTION TO CONSOLIDATE (DPSAGOK)

Case 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 19 Filed 03/28/2006 Page 2 of 3

1 06 926 JF RS, which was substantially identical to the first action, for exhaustion purposes; the

2 Court consolidated the two cases on February 13, 2006.

3

Subsequently, on March 8, 2006, Plaintiff Pacific News Service (“PNS”) filed a First

4 Amendment challenge to Defendants’ use of pancuronium bromide as part of the lethal-injection

5 protocol, Pacific News Service v. Woodford, No. C 06 1793 JF RS; PNS alleges that

6 pancuronium bromide acts as a “chemical curtain” over the lethal-injection process, thus denying

7 the public its right to know what actually occurs during an execution. PNS moved to relate and

8 consolidate its action with those filed by Morales. All parties—that is, both Plaintiffs as well as

9 Defendants—agreed that the actions are related; accordingly, on March 9, 2006, the Court

10 granted PNS’s motion insofar as it sought to relate the actions. However, in order to address

11 substantial case-management raised by Defendants, the Court deferred ruling on consolidation

12 and scheduled a hearing for March 21, 2006; at the hearing, the Court requested supplemental

13 briefing. Having reviewed the papers filed by all parties and having considered the oral

14 arguments of counsel presented at the hearing, the Court will deny the motion to consolidate

15 without prejudice.

16

The parties agree that the determination of whether these actions should be consolidated

17 rests solely on practical considerations. Defendants contend that, in light of the expedited

18 schedule that the Court has adopted to resolve Morales, consolidation will complicate discovery

19 and other procedural matters, thereby making management of the present litigation unduly

20 difficult. Thus, despite the fact that not consolidating the actions may leave an unresolved First

21 Amendment challenge to California’s lethal-injection protocol pending even after the conclusion

22 of the proceedings in Morales, Defendants urge the Court to take a deliberate approach to

23 managing these cases, with PNS being addressed after Morales.

24

While the Court is committed to resolving all aspects of the present litigation

25 expeditiously, it will defer to the State’s expressed concerns. Even absent formal consolidation,

26 the Court has considerable discretion in the management of these cases and may coordinate

27

28 2

Case Nos. C 06 219 JF RS, C 06 926 JF RS & C 06 1793 JF RS ORDER DENYING WITHOUT PREJUDICE MOTION TO CONSOLIDATE (DPSAGOK)

Case 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 19 Filed 03/28/2006 Page 3 of 3

1 various aspects of the cases if and when such coordination is appropriate.1 Accordingly, and

2 good cause therefor appearing, PNS’s motion to consolidate its action with Morales’s actions is

3 denied without prejudice. Any party may bring a renewed motion to consolidate the actions if

4 future developments warrant reconsideration of the appropriateness of consolidation.

5

IT IS SO ORDERED.

6

7 DATED: March 27, 2006 8

__________________________________ JEREMY FOGEL United States District Judge

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25
1At the hearing, counsel for Morales expressed the concern that an appeal of the Court’s
26 judgment in Morales might be pending while the PNS action was still unresolved. Because of the closely
related nature of these actions, as well as the Court’s inherent authority to determine the timing of its
27
decisions, the Court considers this scenario unlikely.
28 3

Case Nos. C 06 219 JF RS, C 06 926 JF RS & C 06 1793 JF RS ORDER DENYING WITHOUT PREJUDICE MOTION TO CONSOLIDATE (DPSAGOK)

