Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document81 Filed10/25/10 Page1 of 8

1 EDMUND G. BROWN JR. Attorney General of California
2 THOMAS S. PATTERSON Supervising Deputy Attorney General
3 MICHAEL J. QUINN Deputy Attorney General
4 State Bar No. 209542 455 Golden Gate Avenue, Suite 11000
5 San Francisco, CA 94102-7004 Telephone: (415) 703-5726
6 Fax: (415) 703-5843 E-mail: Michael.Quinn@doj.ca.gov
7 Attorneys for Defendants Schwarzenegger, Cate, and Cullen
8 IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
9 FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA
10 SAN JOSE DIVISION
11

12

13 PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE,

C 06-1793 JF

14

15

v.

16 MATTHEW CATE, et al.,
17

18

19

20

21

Plaintiff, Defendants.

DEFENDANTS’ MEMORANDUM OF POINTS AND AUTHORITIES IN SUPPORT OF THEIR MOTION TO DISMISS THE SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF UNDER FRCP 12(b)(6) FOR FAILURE TO STATE A CLAIM

Date:

December 2, 2010

Time:

1:30 p.m.

Dept:

Ct. Rm. 3, 5th Fl.

Judge

The Honorable Jeremy Fogel

Trial Date None

Action Filed: March 21, 2006

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

Defs.’ Memo. P & A Supp. Mot. Dismiss (C 06-1793 JF)

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document81 Filed10/25/10 Page2 of 8

1

Defendants Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, Secretary Matthew Cate, and Warden

2 Vincent Cullen (Defendants) submit their Memorandum of Points and Authorities in Support of

3 their Motion to Dismiss the second amended complaint under FRCP 12(b)(6) for failure to state a

4 claim.

5

INTRODUCTION

6

In California First Amendment Coalition v. Woodford, 299 F.3d 868 (9th Cir. 2002)

7 (CFAC), the Ninth Circuit defined the press and the public’s right to view executions under the

8 First Amendment. There, the court concluded that the press and the public have the right to view

9 executions from the moment the condemned is escorted into the execution chamber, including

10 those initial procedures that are inextricably intertwined with the process of putting the

11 condemned inmate to death. CFAC, 299 F.3d at 877.

12

Plaintiff’s second amended complaint, which alleges that pancuronium bromide functions

13 as a “chemical curtain” that conceals information from the press and the public, does not state a

14 claim for relief. The use of pancuronium bromide during a lethal-injection execution does not

15 impede the right that was defined in CFAC because that drug does not affect Plaintiff’s ability to

16 watch the condemned inmate enter the execution chamber, be attached to the execution device,

17 and then die. Id. at 876. Plaintiff, in arguing that the use of pancuronium bromide violates its

18 right of access to public proceedings under the First Amendment, is essentially seeking to observe

19 a different execution proceeding than the State affords by prescribing the drug combination that

20 will be used. However, nothing in CFAC gives Plaintiff the right to dictate the method that the

21 State uses to perform a lethal-injection execution. Accordingly, because the second amended

22 complaint fails to set forth a legally cognizable claim under the First Amendment, it should be

23 dismissed.

24

The second amended complaint should also be dismissed because the Supreme Court’s

25 recent decision in Baze v. Rees, 553 U.S. 35 (2008), demonstrates that there is a “constitutionally

26 legitimate and justifiable reason for administering pancuronium bromide.” (2d Am. Compl. 5:1-

27 2.) In upholding Kentucky’s three-drug lethal-injection protocol, the Court stated that the state’s

28 use of pancuronium bromide did not offend the Eighth Amendment. Id. at 57-58. It also noted 1
Defs.’ Memo. P & A Supp. Mot. Dismiss (C 06-1793 JF)

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document81 Filed10/25/10 Page3 of 8

1 that pancuronium bromide serves two purposes during an execution. First, it preserves the

2 dignity of the procedure by preventing involuntary physical movements during unconsciousness

3 that could accompany the injection of the third drug, potassium chloride. Id. at 57. Second, it

4 stops respiration, hastening death. Id. Given that Defendants have legitimate reasons for

5 administering pancuronium bromide, the second amended complaint should be dismissed.

6

STATEMENT OF THE ISSUE

7

Whether Plaintiff’s second amended complaint, which alleges that the use of pancuronium

8 bromide during a lethal-injection execution functions as a “chemical curtain” that conceals

9 information from the press and the public, states a claim upon which relief can be granted.

10

STATEMENT OF FACTS

11

In its second amended complaint for declaratory and injunctive relief, Plaintiff, a media

12 organization that reports on California executions, seeks temporary, preliminary, and permanent

13 injunctive relief to prevent Defendants from executing any death row inmates in a manner that

14 allegedly conceals important information to which the public is constitutionally entitled. (Sec.

15 Am. Compl. at 1:10-13.)

16

In this case, Plaintiff does not dispute that Defendants permit the press to view execution

17 proceedings. Rather, Plaintiff essentially complains that it is unable to observe a lethal-injection

18 execution conducted without pancuronium bromide. Plaintiff contends that Defendants’ use of

19 pancuronium bromide, a paralytic agent that allegedly acts as a “chemical curtain” over the lethal-

20 injection process, makes it impossible for witnesses to “view adequately” the dying process. (Sec.

21 Am. Compl. at 1:17-19.) PNS alleges that pancuronium bromide (1) prevents society from

22 watching, in a meaningful way, executed inmates die (Sec. Am. Compl. at 6:5-7); (2) suppresses

23 information about whether the inmate experiences pain, and if so, how much (Sec. Am. Compl. at

24 6:8-10); (3) conceals information from members of the press and the public about whether pain is

25 present or absent (Sec. Am. Compl. at 6:23-24); and (4) masks both disputed and undisputed

26 indicia of pain or consciousness (Sec. Am. Compl. at 7:2-3). PNS also alleges that the use of

27 pancuronium bromide prevents the public and the press from obtaining other “socially relevant

28 2
Defs.’ Memo. P & A Supp. Mot. Dismiss (C 06-1793 JF)

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document81 Filed10/25/10 Page4 of 8

1 information,” including an inmate’s attempt to express “repentance, confession, anger or

2 defiance” while fighting off the effects of the sodium pentothal. (Sec. Am. Compl. at 8:5-8.)

3

STANDARD OF REVIEW

4 I. THE STANDARD FOR RULE 12(B)(6) MOTIONS.

5

A Rule 12(b)(6) motion tests the “legal sufficiency of the claim or claims stated in the

6 complaint.” Beliveau v. Caras, 873 F. Supp. 1393, 1395 (C.D. Cal. 1995) (quoting Schwarzer,

7 Tashima and Wagstaffe, California Practice Guide: Federal Civil Procedure Before Trial,

8 §9:187 (1994)). Although Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8(a)(2) does not require a complaint to

9 contain specific facts, it does require the complaint to plead “enough facts to state a claim to relief

10 that is plausible on its face.” Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007)

11 (abrogating the “no set of facts” language of Conley v. Gibson, 355 U.S. 41, 45-46 (1957)). In

12 other words, Plaintiff is obligated to provide “more than labels and conclusions, and a formulaic

13 recitation of the elements of a cause of action.” Id. at 555. The complaint has to have enough

14 factual allegations “to raise a right to relief above the speculative level.” Id.

15 16 I. 17 18 19

ARGUMENT THE SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT SHOULD BE DISMISSED BECAUSE IT FAILS TO STATE A CLAIM UPON WHICH RELIEF CAN BE GRANTED. A. The Decision in California First Amendment Coalition v. Woodford, Which
Established a First Amendment Right of the Press and the Public to View an Execution, Does Not Support Plaintiff’s Claim.

20

In California First Amendment Coalition v. Woodford, 299 F.3d 868 (9th Cir. 2002)

21 (CFAC), the Ninth Circuit examined the extent to which the public and the press are entitled to

22 view an execution. There, the press plaintiffs challenged a procedure that prohibited witnesses

23 from observing an execution until after the execution team had brought the condemned into the

24 chamber, inserted the intravenous lines, and left him alone to await the order to dispense the

25 chemicals. Id. at 870.

26

CFAC recognized that there was both an historical tradition—beginning with entirely

27 public executions and continuing with the practice of inviting official witnesses—and a functional

28 importance of public access to executions. Id. at 877. According to the court, the “public and 3
Defs.’ Memo. P & A Supp. Mot. Dismiss (C 06-1793 JF)

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document81 Filed10/25/10 Page5 of 8

1 press historically have been allowed to watch the condemned inmate enter the execution place, be

2 attached to the execution device, and then die.” Id. at 876. Historical practice strongly supported

3 the public’s First Amendment right to view the condemned as the guards escorted him into the

4 chamber, strapped him to the gurney, and inserted the intravenous lines. Id.

5

The court also noted that independent public scrutiny—made possible by the public and

6 media witnesses to an execution—played a significant role in the proper functioning of capital

7 punishment. Id. In determining whether lethal-injection executions are “fairly and humanely

8 administered, or whether they ever can be, citizens must have reliable information about the

9 ‘initial procedures,’ which are invasive, possibly painful and may give rise to serious

10 complications.” Id. The decision added that the information is best gathered first-hand or from

11 the media, which serves as the public’s surrogate. Id. Therefore, the court held that the public

12 enjoyed a First Amendment right to view executions from the moment the condemned is escorted

13 into the execution chamber, including those “initial procedures” that are inextricably intertwined

14 with the process of putting the condemned inmate to death. Id. at 877.

15

Neither the historical tradition of access to executions nor the functional importance of

16 providing public access to executions supports Plaintiff’s claim. To the contrary, Plaintiff’s

17 second amended complaint fails to set forth any violation of the First Amendment or any other

18 claim upon which relief can be granted, since the state’s use of pancuronium bromide does not

19 restrict Plaintiff’s access to or ability to view an execution. Moreover, nothing in the CFAC

20 decision gives Plaintiff the power to dictate the particular drugs that the State can use in order to

21 perform an execution by lethal injection.

22

1. The Use of Pancuronium Bromide Does Not Violate Plaintiff’s First

Amendment Right to Observe an Execution. 23

24

As mentioned, under CFAC, Plaintiff has the right to view executions “from the moment

25 the condemned enters the execution chamber through, to and including, the time the condemned

26 is declared dead.” 299 F.3d at 885-86. In its second amended complaint, Plaintiff asserts that

27 “pancuronium bromide acts as a chemical curtain that conceals indicia of pain from the members

28 of the press and the public that are observing the executions.” (2d Am. Compl. 6:20-22.) 4
Defs.’ Memo. P & A Supp. Mot. Dismiss (C 06-1793 JF)

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document81 Filed10/25/10 Page6 of 8

1 Plaintiff also contends that pancuronium bromide is administered with the intention of concealing

2 information from the press and the public. (Id. at 9:12-14.)

3

Even if this Court accepts as true all of Plaintiff’s allegations regarding the use of

4 pancuronium bromide (which it must when analyzing a Rule 12(b)(6) motion), the amended

5 complaint fails to set forth a claim upon which relief can be granted. Defendants’ use of

6 pancuronium bromide during a lethal-injection execution does not impede Plaintiff’s ability to

7 exercise the First Amendment right to view executions that was delineated in CFAC. To the

8 contrary, Plaintiff, under the lethal-injection regulations, has the right to examine the execution

9 process from the moment the condemned is escorted into the lethal-injection chamber, and has no

10 restrictions on what it may observe, publish, or choose to withhold. Cal. Code Regs. tit. 15, §

11 3349.4.4(a)(6) (2010). Nothing in Plaintiff’s amended complaint suggests that Plaintiff will be

12 denied the opportunity to view every aspect of the execution procedure authorized by the courts.

13 Because the administration of pancuronium bromide does not hinder Plaintiff’s right of access to

14 view a lethal injection execution, the amended complaint does not state a claim that merits relief.

15

2. Nothing in the CFAC Decision Permits the Press or the Public to

Define How an Execution Should Be Conducted. 16

17

Although Plaintiff has the right to observe an execution from the moment the condemned is

18 led into the execution chamber, the CFAC decision does not provide the press or the public with

19 the right to dictate how the state performs an execution or manipulate what is being observed. If

20 the State were planning to execute a condemned inmate by electric chair, hanging, or firing squad,

21 Plaintiff would have a right to attend and view the proceedings under CFAC. However, in those

22 situations, Plaintiff would not have a First Amendment right to challenge the amount of electricity

23 used to execute the condemned inmate, the number of bullets used by a firing squad, or the type

24 of rope employed in a hanging on the grounds that a different method would enable Plaintiff to

25 better view the “dying process” or to observe the physical impact of the procedures on the inmate.

26 (Sec. Am. Compl. at 1:17-19.) Plaintiff similarly lacks a First Amendment right to object to the

27 use of pancuronium bromide in the course of a lethal injection execution on those grounds.

28 5
Defs.’ Memo. P & A Supp. Mot. Dismiss (C 06-1793 JF)

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document81 Filed10/25/10 Page7 of 8

1

The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized that the Constitution does not accord the press

2 special access to information not shared by members of the public generally. Pell v. Procunier,

3 417 U.S. 817, 834 (1974). In objecting to the use of pancuronium bromide, Plaintiff demands

4 more than special access–it seeks the unprecedented right to alter the method used by the State to

5 perform a lethal-injection execution. However, because Plaintiff’s only interest under the First

6 Amendment is viewing the execution that is actually provided by the State, rather than viewing

7 some other execution comporting more closely to its preferences, the second amended complaint

8 does not state a claim for relief. If CFAC were read as Plaintiff urges, every execution would be

9 subject to challenges on the theory that it “masks” or places a “curtain” over what would occur if

10 the execution were only conducted differently. Furthermore, every change in the execution

11 process would provide a basis for challenging the next execution. Accordingly, because the First

12 Amendment does not provide Plaintiff with the sweeping power to change the State’s execution

13 methods, the second amended complaint should be dismissed.

14

B. The Supreme Court’s Decision in Baze v. Rees Demonstrates That There Is

a Constitutionally Legitimate Reason for Administering Pancuronium

15

Bromide.

16

In Baze v. Rees, 553 U.S. 35, 63 (2008), the United States Supreme Court upheld

17 Kentucky’s three-drug lethal-injection protocol against allegations that it violated the Eighth

18 Amendment’s guarantee against cruel and unusual punishment. The Court’s opinion noted that

19 Kentucky’s use of pancuronium bromide did not violate the Eighth Amendment. Id. at 57-58. To

20 the contrary, administering pancuronium bromide during a lethal-injection execution served two

21 valid purposes. Id. at 57. First, it ensured the dignity of the procedure by preventing involuntary

22 physical movements during unconsciousness that could accompany the injection of potassium

23 chloride. Id. Second, it stopped respiration, hastening death. Id.

24

Plaintiff’s claims that pancuronium bromide “does not meaningfully affect consciousness or

25 the perception of pain,” does not hasten death, and “appears to serve no purpose other than

26 concealing important information about the execution process from the public and the press” are

27 meritless. (2d Am. Compl. 8:13-16.) The Baze decision establishes that pancuronium bromide

28 serves a valid purpose in lethal-injection executions and does not violate the Eighth Amendment. 6
Defs.’ Memo. P & A Supp. Mot. Dismiss (C 06-1793 JF)

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document81 Filed10/25/10 Page8 of 8

1 Therefore, because the second amended complaint fails to set forth a legally cognizable claim, it

2 should be dismissed.

3

CONCLUSION

4

The press and the public have the right to view executions from the moment the

5 condemned enters the chamber until he is declared dead. Because the use of pancuronium

6 bromide, which the Baze Court found to be constitutional, does not impede Plaintiff’s ability to

7 view a lethal-injection execution, the second amended complaint does not state a claim upon

8 which relief can be granted. Accordingly, the complaint should be dismissed.

9 Dated: October 25, 2010
10
11
12
13

Respectfully Submitted, EDMUND G. BROWN JR. Attorney General of California THOMAS S. PATTERSON Supervising Deputy Attorney General

14
15
16
17 SF2006402675 18 20361285.docx

s/ Michael J. Quinn MICHAEL J. QUINN Deputy Attorney General Attorneys for Defendants Schwarzenegger, Cate, and Cullen

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28 7
Defs.’ Memo. P & A Supp. Mot. Dismiss (C 06-1793 JF)

