ase 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 1 of 19

KEKER & VAN NEST, LLP JON B. STREETER - #101970 2 WENDY 1. THURM - #163558 AJAY S. KRISHNAN - #222476 3 KATHERINE FLOREY - # 241647
710 Sansome Street 4 San Francisco, CA 94111-1704
Telephone: (415) 391-5400 5 Facsimile: (415) 397-7188
E-mail: jstreeter@kvn.com 6
ACLU FOUNDATION OF NORTHERN CALIFORNIA 7 ALAN SCHLOSSER - #49957
MICHAEL RISHER - #191627 8 1663 Mission, Suite 460
San Francisco, CA 94103 9 Telephone: (415) 621-2493
Facsimile: (415) 255-1478 10 E-mail: aschlosser@aclunc.org

11 Attorneys for Plaintiff PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE
12

13

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

14

NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA

15

SAN JOSE DIVISION

16

17 PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE,

Case No. C 06 1793 JF RS

18

19

v.

Plaintiff,

PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS COMPLAINT

20 JAMES E. TILTON, Acting Secretary of the California Department of Corrections and
21 Rehabilitation; ROBERT L. AYERS, Acting Warden for the California State Prison at San
22 Quentin,

Dept: Date: Time: Judge:

Courtroom 3, 5th Floor July 19, 2006 1:30 p.m. Hon. Jeremy Fogel

23

Defendants.

24

25

26

27

28

37544702

PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

ase 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 2 of 19

TABLE OF CONTENTS

2

3 I.

INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 1

4 II. 5 III.

FACTS ................................................................................................................................. 3 ARGUMENT ...................................................................................................................... .4

6

A. PNS has standing to pursue its First Amendment claim ......................................... .4

7

1. When analyzing this Rule 12(b)(1) motion, the allegations in

the Complaint are taken as true................................................................... .4

8

2. The Ninth Circuit's CFAC I opinion mandates a finding that

9

PNS has standing.........................................................................................5

10

3. Defendants confuse the concept of standing with the merits-

level inquiry of whether PNS states a valid First Amendment

II

clailll ............................................................................................................. 6

12

B. The PNS Complaint states a claim for which relief may be granted ....................... 7

13

1. PNS states a meritorious claim for violation of its First

Amendment right of access.......................................................................... 7

14

a.

CFAC II has already decided as a matter of law that the

15

qualified First Amendment access right attaches to

executions ........................................................................................ 9

16

b.

Defendants' alleged intentional use ofpancuronium

17

bromide to conceal important infom1ation from the

public cannot survive the First Amendment balancing

18

test. ................................................................................................. 10

19

2.

Cohen v. Cowles Media has no applicability to this case.......................... 13

20 IV. CONCLUSION .................................................................................................................. 15

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28
11

PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

ase 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 3 of 19

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES

2

Page(s)

3

Cases

4

Andersoll v. United States, 245 F. Supp. 2d 1217 (M.D. Fla. 2002) ...................................................................................... 5

5 Brvan v. Moore, '120 S. Ct. 1003 (2000) ................................................................................................................ 9

6 Cable News Network, Illc. v. Am. Broad. Cos.,

7

518F.Supp.1238(N.D.Ga.198I) ............................................................................................ 8

Cal!lornia First Amendment Coalition v. Woodford,

8 299 F.3d 868 (9th Cir. 2002) ("CFAC It'), modifying in part, 150 F.3d 976 (9th Cir. 1998) ("CFAC t') ............................................ passim

9 Cohen v. Cowles Media Co.,

10

501 U.S. 663 (1991) ............................................................................................................ 13,14

Fierro v. Gomez,

II

865 F. Supp. 1387 (N.D. Cal. 1994) ........................................................................................... 9

12

Flynt v. Rum:-.feld, 355 F.3d 697 (D.C. Cir. 2004) ................................................................................................ 6,7

13 Frasure v. United States,

256 F. Supp. 2d 1180 (D. Nev. 2003) ......................................................................................... 5

14 Friends o.lEarth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Envtl. Servs., Inc.,

IS

528 U.S. 167 (2000) .................................................................................................................... 5

Globe Newspaper Co. v. Superior Court,

16 457 U.S. 596 (1982) .................................................................................................................... 8

17

Gould Elecs., Inc. v. United States, 220 F.3d 169 (3d Cir. 2000) ....................................................................................................... 4

18 Hearns v. Terhune,

413 F.3d 1036 (9th Cir. 2005) .................................................................................................... 7

19 Hydrick v. Hunter,

20

No. 03-56712, 2006 WL 1493100 (9th Cir. June 1,2006) ....................................................... 12

JOlles v. Butterworth,

21

695 So. 2d 679 (Fla. 1997) ......................................................................................................... 9

22

KQED, Inc. v. Vasquez, 18 Media L. Rep. 2323 (N.D. Cal. 1991) ................................................................................... 8

23 McLachlan v. Bell,

261 F.3d 908 (9th Cir. 2001) ...................................................................................................... 4

24 Mortensen v. First Federal Sav. & Loan Ass 'n,

25

549 F.2d 884 (3d Cir. 1977) ....................................................................................................... 4

Oregon Newspaper Publishers Assn. v. Oregon,

26 988 P.2d 359 (Or. 1999) ............................................................................................................. 8

27

Oregonian Publ 'g Co. v. United States District Court, 920 F.2d 1462 (9th Cir. 1990) .................................................................................................... 8

28

HI

PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

ase 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 4 of 19

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES

(cont'd)

2

Page(s)

3 Pell v. Procullier,

417 U.S. 817 (1974) .................................................................................................................. II

4 Press-Enterprise Co. v. Superior Court,

5

464 U.S. 50 1 (1984) .................................................................................................................... 7

Press-Enterprise Co. v. Superior Court,

6 478 U.S. 1 (1986) ........................................................................................................................ 8

7

Procunier v. Martinez, 416 U.S. 396 (1974) .................................................................................................................. II

Richmond New,\papers v. Virginia, 448 U.S. 555 (1980) ................................................................................................................ 1,7

Rllpe v. Wood,

10

93 F.3d 1434 (9th Cir. 1996) ...................................................................................................... 9

Sims v. Florida,

11 2000 WL 193226 (Fla. 2000) ..................................................................................................... 9

12

Soc 'y ofProf'I Journalists v. Sec y ofLabor,
616 F. Supp. 569 (D. Utah 1985) ................................................................................................ 8

13 Trentacosta v. Frontier Pac. Aircraft Indus., Inc.,

813 F.2d 1553 (9th Cir. 1987) .................................................................................................... 5

14 TlIrner Broad. Sys., Inc. v. Fed. Commc'lIs Comm 'n,

15

512 U.S. 622 (1994).................................................................................................................. 13

Turner v. Safley,
16 482 U.S. 78 (1987) ........................................................................................................ 10,1 L 13

17

United Phosphorus, Ltd. v. Angus Chem. Co., 322 F.3d 942 (7th Cir. 2003) ...................................................................................................... 5

18 Vt. Agency ofNatural Res. v. United States ex reI. Stevens,

529 U.S. 765 (2000) .................................................................................................................... 5

19 Walker v. Sumner,

20

917 F.2d 382 (9th Cir. 1990) .............................................................................................. 11,12

Westmoreland v. Columbia Broad. Sys., Inc.,

21

752 F.2d 16 (2d Cir. 1984) ......................................................................................................... 8

22

WIT itmire v. Arizona, 298 F.3d 1134 (9th Cir. 2002) ............................................................................................ 11,12

23 Wilbur v. Locke, 423 F.3d 1101 (9th Cir. 2005) .................................................................................................... 5
24

25

26

27

28
1111

PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

ase 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 5 of 19

I. INTRODUCTION

2

Defendants' motion to dismiss must be denied under the controlling authority of

3 California First Amelldment Coalition v. Woodford, 299 F.3d 868 (9th Cir. 2002) ("CFAC 11'),

4 I/lodifving in part, 150 F.3d 976 (9th Cir. 1998) ("CFAC 1') (collectively, "CFAC"). The

5 principles enunciated by the Ninth Circuit in CFAC are directly applicable to the factual

6 allegations of this Complaint and are dispositive of this motion.

7

In CFAC, plaintiff media organizations challenged San Quentin prison's practice of

8 closing a curtain in front ofthe execution chamber during certain portions of the prison's lethal

9 injection executions. The curtain prevented members of the media and the press from viewing

10 critical aspects of the execution process. San Quentin officials claimed they needed the curtain

II to protect the anonymity of the prison staff, and therefore, to ensure the execution could proceed

12 smoothly. The lawsuit sought to vindicate the media's First Amendment right of access to

13 important public proceedings, a right that was first recognized in Richmond Newspapers v.

14 Virginia, 448 U.S. 555 (1980). That right is central to our system of self-government because

15 "valuable public debate-as well as other civic behavior-must be informed." 1d. at 587

16 (Brennan, J., concurring).

17

The Ninth Circuit's ruling upheld the media plaintiffs' claim ofa First Amendment right

18 of access. It held that they had standing because the curtain inhibited their reporting on the

19 execution. The court also held that the First Amendment right of access attaches to executions,

20 because executions are historically open and because the information that can be gleaned from

21 observing executions-particularly whether the inmate experiences pain-is crucial to informing

22 the public debate on the death penalty. And it held that the socially valuable information to be

23 gleaned from opening the curtain outweighed the prison's asserted interest in anonymity,

24 particularly because the execution team could take less restrictive action to achieve their stated

25 goal, by wearing masks.

26

The claim raised here is nearly identical to the claim in CFA C. Plaintiff Pacific News

27 Service is a media organization that reports on executions. Instead of a physical curtain, PNS

28 complains of a chemical curtain. PNS alleges that San Quentin's practice of paralyzing inmates

37544702

PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

ase 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 6 of 19

while it is executing them suppresses the same socially important information that was at issue in

2 CFA C: whether or not the inmate is experiencing pain during the execution. San Quentin

3 officials create this chemical curtain by administering to the inmate pancuronium bromide, a

4 paralytic agent, which does not contribute to or hasten the inmate's death. Because it paralyzes

S the inmate, pancuronium bromide prevents witnesses from discerning whether or not the inmate

6 is experiencing pain. Prison officials simply inject a curtain into the inmate.

7

The legal analysis is the same as it was in CFAC. PNS has standing because it reports on

8 executions, and San Quentin's practice of paralyzing inmates during the execution inhibits that

9 reporting. And CFAC has already held that the First Amendment right of access attaches to

10 executions. Finally, here, as in CFAC, the First Amendment interest in observing important

II information outweighs the government interest in suppressing that information. Indeed, this is

12 an even clearer case than CFAC. Although San Quentin officials asserted an ostensibly rational

13 interest in execution team anonymity in CFA C, they have no reason to paralyze inmates while

14 executing them, other than the illegitimate purpose of creating the appearance that executions are

15 more peaceful and painless than they actually may be.

16

In their motion to dismiss, Defendants manufacture a distinction between the media

17 "observing" ·an execution and the media "controlling" an execution. Their strategy is clear: they

18 need some way to distinguish the physical curtain in CFAC from the chemical curtain at issue

19 here. But the distinction they've come up with is incoherent. Every successful assertion of a

20 constitutional right "controls" what the government does in some way. For instance, the CFAC

21 plaintiffs "controlled" executions by forcing California to remove its curtain. Moreover,

22 Defendants'distinction ignores that PNS is not even seeking to control an execution. Paralyzing

23 inmates has nothing to do with executing them: the paralytic drug serves no purpose in the

24 execution process. In fact, Defendants are perfectly able to execute inmates without paralyzing

2S them, just as they are able to execute inmates without closing a curtain.

26

Defendants try to cast this distinction between "observing" and "controlling" both as a

27 standing argument and as an argument rooted in the First Amendment right of access case law.

28 No standing case or First Amendment right of access case makes this distinction.

37544702

2
PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

ase 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 7 of 19

Thus, Defendants' motion to dismiss must be denied.

2

II. FACTS

3

As explained below, for both the Rule 12(b)(I) and Rule 12(b)(6) aspects of the motion

4 to dismiss, the factual allegations of the Complaint must be taken as true. Defendants have not

5 submitted any declarations or other evidence in support of their motion to dismiss. Thus, the

6 following facts are the only ones before the Court:

7

Plaintiff PNS is a media organization that reports on California executions. Compl., ~ 4.

8 PNS is interested in disseminating information on what eyewitnesses to California executions

9 observe during the lethal injection process. ld. Defendants James Tilton and Robert Ayers are

10 the respective heads of the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation ("CDCR")
II and the San Quentin prison, which is within CDCR. ld., ~~ 5 & 6. These institutions administer
12 every California execution. 1d.,'1 8.

13

Executions by lethal injection are performed pursuant to San Quentin Operational

14 Procedure No. 770 ("Procedure 770"). Id., ~ 10. Members of the press and the public view these

15 executions. ld., ~. Procedure 770 involves the injection of three drugs, in order: sodium

16 pentothal, pancuronium bromide, and potassium chloride. ld., ~ 11. Sodium pentothal is

17 intended to anesthetize the inmate so that he is unable to feel pain. ld., ~ 12. Pancuronium

18 bromide paralyzes all ofthe inmate's voluntary muscles. ld., ~ 1l. It therefore prevents the

19 inmate from. moving, speaking, or communicating in any manner. ld., ~ 17. Potassium chloride

20 stops the inmate's heart. ld., ~ 11.

21

There is a serious question as to whether Defendants are properly administering sodium

22 pentothal during lethal injection executions. ld., ~ 16. If they are improperly administering

23 sodium pentothal, the inmate would experience intolerable and unnecessary pain when the other

24 two drugs are administered. ld. However, because Defendants administer pancuronium

25 bromide, the press and public witnesses observing the execution will never know whether the
26 inmate is experiencing this intolerable and unnecessary pain while dying. ld., '117. There is

27 potentially other socially valuable information, unrelated to pain, that pancuronium bromide is
28 also suppressing. Jd.,'1 19-20.

37544702

3
PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

ase 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 8 of 19

Pancuronium bromide is therefore a chemical curtain. Id., ~ 1. It prevents execution

2 witnesses from seeing what is really happening during an execution. Id., ~~ 17-20. Pancuronium

3 bromide serves no legitimate functional or penological purpose during an execution, such as

4 anesthetizing the inmate or hastening his death. !d., ~ 21. Defendants know this, but nonetheless

5 continue to use pancuronium bromide. Id. Therefore, Defendants intentionally use pancuronium

6 bromide to conceal socially important information from the press and the pUblic. Id., ~ 22.

7

8

III. ARGUMENT

9 A. PNS has standing to pursue its First Amendment claim.

10

PNS has standing for the same reason that the CFAC plaintiffs had standing: a media

11 organization that reports on governmental proceedings has standing to challenge restrictions that

12 impede their ability to report on those proceedings. Defendants cite no contrary authority.

13 Indeed, close scrutiny of Defendants' standing argument reveals that they are not really making a

14 standing argument at all. Rather, their challenge is to the merits of PNS' s claim.

15

1. When analyzing this Rule 12(b)(1) motion, the allegations in the Complaint

are taken as true.

16

When analyzing standing, the Court must take the allegations in PNS's Complaint as

17

true. This is because Defendants have neither challenged the factual allegations in the PNS

18

Complaint nor submitted any declarations in support of their 12(b)(1) motion. Consequently,

19

there will be no evidentiary hearing. See McLachlan v. Bell, 261 F.3d 908, 909 & n.2 (9th CiT.

20

2001) (holding that factual allegations in the complaint are accepted as true if the court is not

21

called upon to hold an evidentiary hearing); see also Gould Elecs., Inc. v. United States, 220 F.3d

22

169, 176-77 (3d CiT. 2000) (citing Mortensen v. First Federal Sav. & Loan Ass 'n, 549 F.2d 884,

23

891 (3d CiT. 1977) ("At the outset, we must emphasize a crucial distinction, often overlooked,

24

between 12(b)( I) motions that attack the complaint on its face and 12(b)( 1) motions that attack

25

the existence of subject matter jurisdiction in fact, quite apart from any pleadings. The facial

26

attack does offer similar [Rule 12(b)(6)] safeguards to the plaintiff: the court must consider the

27

allegations ofthe complaint as true.")).

28

37544702

4
PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS
!

ase 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 9 of 19

Thus, Defendants' argument that "Plaintiff's allegations are not presumed to be true" is

2 simply wrong. Indeed, all four cases cited by Defendants recognize the distinction that PNS

3 raises between those Rule 12(b)( 1) motions where the defendant challenges the factual

4 allegations of the complaint by submitting competent evidence and those Rule l2(b)( 1) motions

5 where the complaint's factual allegations go unchallenged. See Mot. to Dismiss CompI. at 3;

6 Frasure v. United States, 256 F. Supp. 2d 1180, 1184 (D. Nev. 2003); Anderson v. United States,

7 245 F. Supp. 2d 1217,2020 (M.D. Fla. 2002); United Phosphorus, Ltd. v. Angus Chem. Co., 322

8 F.3d 942, 946 (7th Cir. 2003); Trentacosta v. Frontier Pac. Aircraft Indus., Inc., 813 F.2d 1553,

9 1558-59 (9th Cir. 1987).

10

PNS may rest on its Complaint and need not submit evidence to establish standing.

11

2. The Ninth Circuit's CFAC I opinion mandates a finding that PNS has

standing.

12

To establish Article III standing, PNS must demonstrate that: (1) it will suffer an "injury-

13

in-fact"; (2) "the injury is fairly traceable to the challenged action"; and (3) "it is likely, as

14

opposed to merely speculative, that the injmy will be redressed by a favorable decision." Wilbur

15

v. Locke, 423 F .3d 1101, 1107 (9th Cir. 2005) (citing Friends ofEarth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Ellvtl.

16

Servs., Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 180-81 (2000)). As a shorthand, these requirements are labeled

17

"injury in fact," "causation," and "redressability." Vt. Agency ofNatural Res. v. United States ex

18

reI. Stevens, 529 U.S. 765,771 (2000).

19

In CFAC 1, the Ninth Circuit held that media organizations that report on executions have

20

standing to challenge alleged violations of the First Amendment right to witness executions.

21

This holding was never revisited in CFAC II. CFAC I reasoned:

22

[Plaintiffs] have covered or observed executions in the past and are likely to do so

23

in the future. The restrictive procedures of which [Plaintiffs] complain[] could

hinder its members' ability to do their work and would cause an injury in fact to

24

them. In particular, [Plaintiff] could be stifled in reporting to the public about

how executions were being carried out.

25

CFAC 1, I SO F.3d at 980-81. This analysis regarding injury-in-fact and causation applies equally

26

to PNS's claim in this case. PNS has "covered or observed executions in the past and is likely to

,r 27 do so in the future." ld.; see Complaint, 4 (alleging that PNS "reports on, among other things,

28

375447.02

5
PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

se 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 10 of 19

the application of the death penalty in California"). Defendants do not contest this. In addition,

2 "the restrictive procedures of which [PNS] complains"-namely the use ofpancuronium

3 bromide-could hinder its members' ability to "report[] to the public about how executions were

4 being carried out." CFAC 1,150 F.3d at 980-81; see Complaint ~~ 18-20 (describing intormation

5 important to the public that is concealed by pancuronium bromide). Defendants do not contest

6 this point either. Thus, PNS satisfies the injury-in-fact and causation requirements.

7

Although CFAC I did not expressly address the third standing requirement, redressability,

8 it was not seriously in dispute there or here. In CFAC I, enjoining the state from drawing the

9 curtain would reveal to execution witnesses reportable information concerning the "initial

10 procedures," thereby redressing the CFACplaintiffs' concerns. Similarly, the injunction sought

I I here would prohibit San Quentin officials from suppressing important information about the

12 execution process.

13

Thus, CFAC I, which Defendants never cite, answers the standing question in PNS'

14 favor.

15

3. Defendants confuse the concept of standing with the merits-level inquiry of

whether PNS states a valid First Amendment claim.

16

Ultimately, Defendants do not raise any actual standing arguments because they have

17

fundamentally confused the concept of standing with the merits ofPNS's First Amendment

18

challenge. It goes without saying that the question of standing is separate from and independent

19

of the question of whether a plaintiff states a valid claim on the merits. For instance, in CFAC I

20

itself, the Ninth Circuit held that the plaintiffs had standing, despite holding that the plaintiffs

21

would not necessarily prevail on the merits. 150 F.3d at 980 n.8; see also Flynt v. Rum:,feld, 355

22

F.3d 697, 699 & 702-03 (D.C. Cir. 2004) (holding that although reporters have standing to

23

challenge a military regulation that prevents them from "accompany[ing] ground troops on

24

combat missions" in Afghanistan, the regulation does not violate the First Amendment).

2S

Detendants' motion evidences their confusion between the concept of standing and the

26

merits-level inquiry. Defendants correctly recite the three Article III standing requirements in

27

Section A of their standing argument. See Mot. to Dismiss Compl. at 2-3. But, Section B of

28

375447.02

6
PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

se S:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 11 of 19

their standing argument-where they purport to apply the law of standing to this case-only

2 makes merits-level arguments. Indeed, Section B's heading reads: "Because Plaintiff Has No

3 Legally Protected Interest In The Means By Which An Execution Is Conducted The Court Lacks

4 Jurisdiction To Hear The Case." Id. at 3. In essence, Defendants argue that because PNS has no

5 First Amendment right, PNS lacks standing. Moreover, of the nine cases cited in Section B of

6 Defendants' standing argument, eight contain no discussion of standing at all. They simply

7 pertain to the merits of the constitutional rights at issue in those cases. Id. at 3-5. The ninth case,

8 Flvilt v. RUlmfeld, actually held that the plaintiffs there did have standing. 355 F.3d at 702.

9 Even still, the only portion of Flynt that Defendants cite to pertains to F(vnt's holding on the

10 merits. See Mot. to Dismiss Compi. at 5; Flynt, 355 F.3d at 703.

11

Thus, Defendants do not make a standing argument at all. Rather, they only attack the

12 Complaint on the merits, to which PNS now turns.
13 B. The PNS Complaint states a claim for which relief may be granted.

14

There is no dispute that when analyzing the merits of PNS' First Amendment claim, the

15 Court must accept the factual allegations in the Complaint as true. Hearns v. Terhune, 413 F.3d

16 1036, 1040 (9th Cir. 2005). Thus, the Court must take as true PNS' allegations that

17 "pancuronium bromide serves no legitimate functional or penological purpose in the lethal

18 injection protocol," and that Defendants "intentionally administer pancuronium bromide to

19 conceal important information from the press and the public." Id., ~~ 21, 22. It is with these

20 serious allegation in mind that the Court should approach the relevant First Amendment case

21 law.

22

1. PNS states a meritorious claim for violation of its First Amendment right of

access.

23

This case involves the application of the First Amendment right to attend and witness

24

important public proceedings in the context of an execution. That right was established in

25

Richmond Newspapers, 448 U.S. 555. This presumptive right of access to government

26

proceedings now attaches to virtually every phase of the criminal and civil justice process, 1 to

27

28
37544702

1 See. e.g., Press-Enterprise Co. v. Superior Court, 464 U.S. 501 (1984) ("Press-Enterprise f')
7
PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

(~se 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 12 of 19

executive proceedings, 2 and to executions inside prisons. 3 The primary purpose of this First

2 Amendment access right is "[t]o ensure that [the] constitutionally protected 'discussion of

3 government affairs' is an informed one." Globe Newspaper Co. v. Superior Court, 457 U.S. 596,

4 605 (1982).

5

Courts employ a two-step analysis to determine whether a restriction on access to a

6 particular government proceeding violates the First Amendment. Press-Enterprise Co. v.

7 Superior Court, 478 U.S. 1,9-10 (1986) ("Press-Enterprise 11'). First, the First Amendment

8 right of access must attach to the proceeding. Id. Second, if the First Amendment access right

9 does attach, the restriction must survive a First Amendment balancing test: the legitimate

10 governmental interests it serves must outweigh the loss of First Amendment values. Id. Thus,

II even where the First Amendment right of access attaches to a proceeding, it is qualified, not

12 absolute. Id.

13

To state a claim under the First Amendment for violation of the right of access, the

14 Complaint's allegations must establish (1) that the First Amendment right of access attaches to

IS executions, and (2) that the state's practice of paralyzing death row inmates fai Is the appropriate

16 First Amendment balancing test. The Complaint satisfies both prongs of this test. The first

17 prong is directly controlled and established by CFAC II, a decision that binds this Court. The

18 second prong is clearly satisfied, given the allegations that pancuronium bromide serves no

19 legitimate purpose during an execution and that the state intentionally paralyzes inmates in order

20 to conceal socially important information from the public and press.

21

22

23 (voir dire proceedings); Press-Enterprise II, 478 U.S. 1 (preliminary hearings in criminal prosecution); Oregonian Publ'g Co. v. United States District Court, 920 F.2d 1462 (9th Cir.
24 1990) (plea agreements); Westmoreland v. Columbia Broad. Sys., Inc., 752 F.2d 16 (2d Cir. 1984) (civil trials).
25 2 See, e.g., Soc y ofProf'I Journalists v. Sec yofLabor, 616 F. Supp. 569 (D. Utah 1985)
26 (forn1al agency hearings); Cable News Network, Inc. v. Am. Broad. Cos., 518 F. Supp. 1238 (N.D. Ga. 1981) (White House events).
27 3 CFAC II, 299 F.3d at 877; KQED, Inc. v. Vasquez, 18 Media L. Rep. 2323 (N.D. Cal. 1991). See also Oregon Newspaper Pablishers Assn. v. Oregon, 988 P.2d 359 (Or. 1999) (vindicating
28 analogous public right to meaningfully witness executions based on state statute).

37544702

8
PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

se S:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 13 of 19

a. CFA C II has already decided as a matter of law that the qualified

First Amendment access right attaches to executions.

2

CFA C IJ held that the press and the public have a right to meaningfully observe

3

executions "from the moment the condemned enters the execution camber through, to and

4

including, the time the condemned is declared dead." CFAC 11,299 F.3d at 885-86 (citations

5

omitted). Defendants concede this. Mot. to Dismiss Compl. at 3. This holding, on its face,

6

satisfies the first step of the two-step analysis performed in First Amendment right-of-access

7

cases.

8

Importantly, CFAC II's reasons for extending the First Amendment right of access to

9

executions are partiCUlarly relevant in the context ofPNS's claim. CFAC II's holding rested on

10

three considerations:

1 1

1. the developing body of case law recognizing the First Amendment right of access

12

to most aspects of the criminal justice system, including trials, pre- and post-trial

proceedings, and prisons;

13

2. the historical tradition of public access to executions, from Twelfth century

14

England to the modern American practice; and

15

3. the functional importance of public access to executions, namely its contribution

to public dialogue on the humaneness of the death penalty and the appearance of

16

fairness that public access fosters.

17 CFAC IJ, 299 F.3d at 874-77.

18

The primary type of information to which PNS seeks access is the indicia of pain that an

19 inmate manifests during the killing process (not merely indicia of pain during the "initial

20 procedures," which were at issue in CFAC). This is precisely the type of information in which

21 there is historical and functional interest. As the District Court stated in CFAC:

22

Courts evaluating the constitutionality of methods of execution rely in part on

eyewitness testimony. See, e.g., Jones v. Butterworth, 695 So. 2d 679 (Fla. 1997);

23

Sims v. Florida, 2000 WL 193226 at *7-8 (Fla. 2000); Fierro v. Gomez, 865 F.

Supp. 1387 (N.D. Cal. 1994). This eyewitness testimony is crucial to the review

24

of execution protocols which the courts frequently undertake. While courts rarely

invalidate a state's execution procedure, ongoing challenges and threats of

25

challenge motivate states to modify their procedures. For example, lethal gas and

electrocution have been vigorously challenged in recent years. In response to

26

these challenges, most states have either moved to the use of lethal injection or

make it available as an alternative to gas, electrocution or hanging. See, e.g.,

27

Bryan v. Moore, 120 S. Ct. 1003 (2000) (certiorari to determine constitutionality

of electrocution dismissed as improvident after state modified statute to permit

28

execution by lethal injection); Rupe v. Wood, 93 F.3d 1434 (9th Cir. 1996)

375447.02

9
PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

se 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 14 of 19

(constitutionality of hanging a 400-pound man rendered moot after state modified

statute to permit lethal injection).

2 CFAC, 2000 WL 33173913 at *9 (N.D. Cal. 2000), aff'd, 299 F.3d 868 (9th Cir. 2002).

3 This Court should heed both the holding and reasoning in CFAC when evaluating

4 Defendants' motion to dismiss. Defendants consistently mischaracterize PNS's Complaint as an

5 effort by a news organization to satisfy its predictable preference for more information, as if PNS

6 merely seeks information of trivial importance. Defendants claim that PNS seeks greater access

7 to executions because "such access might lead to more thorough or better reporting" (Mot. to

8 Dismiss CompI. at 5, Ins 4-5), because PNS seeks an "execution comporting more closely with

9 its preferences" (Mot. to Dismiss CompI. at 6, Ins 7-8), or because PNS's ability to report "would

10 be enhanced by access to particular information or locations" (Mot. to Dismiss CompI. at 6, Ins

11 7-8). This is simply not true. Through this lawsuit, PNS seeks access to precisely the type of

12 illlportCln t information that motivated the CFA C court to recognize the right of access to

13 executions in the first place: information about pain that the inmate may experience as a result of

14 the execution process. Thus, the importance of the type of information PNS seeks is a key

IS

consideration.

16

b. Defendants' alleged intentional use of pancuronium bromide to

17

conceal important information from the public cannot survive the

First Amendment balancing test.

18 Given that the First Amendment access right attaches to executions, the only remaining

19 question is whether the particular challenged restriction survives First Amendment scrutiny. The

20 restriction at issue here is San Quentin's use of pancuronium bromide to paralyze the inmate's

21 body so as to conceal from the public possible manifestations of pain or other important

22

information.

23 In the prison context, courts typically use the four-factor balancing test of Turner v.

24 Sa/lev, 482 U.S. 78 (1987), to evaluate whether an asserted constitutional right outweighs the

25 legitimate penological interests of the prison. See CFAC II, 299 F.3d at 877-794 ; Walker v.

26

27 4 The CFAC II court had serious doubts about employing the deferential Turner standard because
28 the challenged restriction-the drawing of the curtain-actually infringed the rights of nonprisoners. 299 F.3d at 878-79. Nonetheless, CFAC II persisted with the Turner test because

375447.02

10
PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

Case S:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 15 of 19

SUlIlner, 917 F.2d 382, 385-86 (9th Cir. 1990); Whitmire v. Arizona, 298 F.3d 1134, 1136 (9th

2 Cir. 2002). Courts use the Turner test because it is deferential to prison officials, who face

3 "complex and intractable" problems of prison administration that are not easily resolved by

4 judicial decree. CFAC II, 299 F.3d at 877-78 (quoting Procunier v. Martinez, 416 U.S. 396,

5 404-05 (1974 )). The Turner test itselflays out those "legitimate policies and goals of the

6 conections system" that fall within the special province or expertise of prison officials:

7 "detenence of future crime, protection of society by quarantining criminal offenders,

8 rehabilitation of those offenders and preservation of internal security." Id. at 878 (citing Pell v.

9 Procullier, 417 U.S. 817, 822-23 (1974)).

10

With those "legitimate penological objectives" defined, the Turner test states: "in

11 reviewing a challenge to a prison regulation that burdens fundamental rights, [courts1are

12 directed to ask whether the regulation is reasonably related to legitimate penological objectives,

13 or whether it represents an exaggerated response to those concerns." Id. (internal quotations

14 omitted) (quoting Turner, 482 U.S. at 87). More specifically:

15

In determining whether a restriction on the exercise of rights is reasonable or

exaggerated in light of those penological interests, four factors are relevant: (1)

1 6

whether there is a valid, rational connection between the prison regulation and the

legitimate governmental interest put forward to justify it; (2) whether there are

17

alternative means of exercising the right that remain open to prison inmates; (3)

what impact accommodation of the asserted constitutional rights will have on

18

guards and other inmates, and on the allocation of prison resources generally and

(4) whether there exist ready alternatives that fully accommodate the prisoner's

19

rights at de minimis cost to valid penological interests.

20 Id. (internal quotations omitted) (quoting Turner, 482 U.S. at 89-91).

21

Two important observations should be made about the first prong of the Turner v. Safley

22 test. First, if the government has an illegitimate purpose of concealing information from the

23 public, it automatically fails the balancing test. CFAC II, 299 F.3d at 880. Second, if there is no

24
25 CFAC I had done so, and the subsequent panel found itself bound by CFAC 1. Id. at 879. Because Defendants cannot prevail even under the Turner standard, it is immaterial to the
26 outcome of this motion whether a less deferential balancing test should apply. Additionally, CFAC II actually applied a stricter version of the Turner test, requiring slightly
27 greater scrutiny of government conduct. 299 F.3d at 879-80 (requiring a "closer fit"). Again, because this heightened standard is immaterial to the outcome of the balancing test in this
28 motion, PNS omits further discussion of it here.

375447.02

11
PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

se 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 16 of 19

"legitimate governmental interest" that justifies the restriction on fundamental rights, there is no

2 need for further analysis because there is nothing against which to weigh the infringement of the

] plaintiff's rights. Id. at 883 ("the first factor is arguably dispositive."); see also Walker, 917 F.2d

4 at 385 ("The first of these factors constitutes a sine qua non.").

5

Defendants' practice of paralyzing inmates during executions clearly fails this test, for

6 two independent reasons. First, PNS has alleged that Defendants intentionally paralyze inmates

7 to conceal information from the public. Second, PNS has alleged that there is no legitimate

8 government interest in using pancuronium bromide. Thus, for purposes ofthis motion, there is

I) no interest to weigh against the loss of PNS' s First Amendment access rights. This case is

10 therefore even easier than the numerous cases where courts refused to dismiss the complaint at

I I the pleadings stage, even where the government was able to assert a plausible penological

12 interest to justify its conduct. See, e.g., Hydrick v. Hunter, No. 03-56712, 2006 WL 1493100, at

13 *9-*10 (9th Cir. June 1,2006) (pending publication in the Federal Reporter); Whitmire, 298 F.3d

14 1134 (scrutinizing the prison's asserted justification for the challenged policy); Walker, 917 F.2d

15 at 385-86. In these cases, the Ninth Circuit refused to weigh the government's asserted

16 penological interests against the asserted right at the pleadings stage to justify dismissing the

17 complaint. Here, Defendants do not even attempt to assert an interest in paralyzing inmates

18 while executing them. See Mot. to Dismiss CompI. at 4-5 ("Putting to one side whether Plaintiff

19 correctly understands the effects of pancuronium and the reasons it is used by the state, the

20 'right' Plaintiff claims for itself is not provided by the First Amendment."). Thus, any balancing

21 that is performed to decide this motion must be resolved in PNS' s favor.

22

Yet, Defendants somehow appear to have missed that a First Amendment balancing test

23 exists. Defendants argue that "the First Amendment does not guarantee unfettered access to

24 places, events, or information." See id. at 7; see also id. at 4-5. They then cite numerous cases

25 where the plaintiff raising a First Amendment right of access lost. ld. at 7. The only principle

26 that can be gleaned from this analysis is that the plaintiff always loses, and the government

27 always wins. Of course, PNS recognizes that the First Amendment right of access is not

28 "unfettered." This is why there is a balancing test. Nowhere in their 9-page brief, however, do

375447.02

12
PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

se 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 17 of 19

Defendants even mention a balancing test. Nor do Defendants cite the numerous Supreme Court

2 cases in which the plaintiff raising a First Amendment right of access claim prevailed. See, e.g.,

3 supra footnotes 1-3.

4

This failure to recognize that a balancing test exists explains the central fallacy in

5 Defendants' brief. Defendants appear to believe that there is a bright-line distinction between

6 "ohserv[illg]" an execution and "defin[ing] how the execution should be conducted." See Mot. to

7 Dismiss Compi. at 4. But this notion fundamentally contradicts the idea of a balancing test.

8 Whenever a plaintiff prevails under Turner, the court is necessarily, in some sense, telling the

9 government what to do. Turner applies whenever a prison official is alleged to have violated a

10 fundamental right, not just in the execution context. Thus, the balancing test was used in CFAC

II to "define how the execution should be conducted" (i.e., without a curtain), and in Turner itself

12 to "define how" the prison operated. Turner, 482 U.S. at 94-99 (holding invalid a prison mle

13 requiring prior approval before inmates could marry). The Turner test already takes into

14 consideration the deference owed to prisons, but nonetheless countenances courts striking down

IS prison rules when they unjustifiably violate fundamental rights. Thus, the bright-line distinction

16 Defendants seek to draw between "observ[ing]" an execution and "defin[ing] how the execution

I7 should be conducted" simply does not exist.

18

2. Cohen v. Cowles Media has no applicability to this case.

19

Instead of addressing Turner, Defendants argue instead that the PNS Complaint should

20 be dismissed under the doctrine that neutral rules of general applicability "do not offend the First

21 Amendment simply because their enforcement against the press has incidental effects on its

22 ability to gather and report the news." Mot. to Dismiss Compi. at 8 (quoting Cohen v. Cowles

23 Media Co., 501 U.S. 663, 669 (1991)). But this case is a far cry from Cohen and its line of cases.

24 See also Turner Broad. Sys., Inc. v. Fed. Commc'ns Comm'n, 512 U.S. 622, 640-41 (1994).

25

In Cohen, a confidential source sued reporters who broke their prom ise of confidential ity.

26 The reporters invoked the First Amendment as a defense. They argued that they could not be 27 held liable on a promissory estoppel theory under Minnesota law, because that would effectively
punish them for reporting important news. The Supreme Court rejected the reporters' argument.

375447.02

13
PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

5e S:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 18 of 19

The Court held that there was no basis for heightened First Amendment scrutiny because the

2 state law of promissory estoppel, which "simply requires those making promises to keep them,"

3 was (I) neutral toward First Amendment conduct and (2) generally applicable to all citizens, not

4 just members of the press. Cohen, 501 U.S. at 669-72.

5

But paralyzing inmates during an execution is not neutral toward First Amendment

6 conduct-~that is, it necessarily inhibits the ability of the press to gather information of public

7 importance. In the very same way that the physical curtain in CFAC was not neutral towards the

8 free flow of information to the public, this chemical curtain has the natural and direct effect of

9 cutting off access to information. More so than a curtain, paralysis serves no legitimate purpose

10 during an execution. Additionally, PNS has alleged that Defendants intentionally paralyze

II inmates to conceal infom1ation. Thus, there is no way in which Defendants' use of pancuronium

12 bromide can be seen as neutral to First Amendment conduct.

13

Perhaps more importantly, paralysis of inmates is not a generally applicable rule.

14 Procedure 770 does not call for the paralysis of all inmates at San Quentin; only the ones who are

15 being executed receive pancuronium bromide. San Quentin's practice of paralyzing inmates

16 during executions is not like Minnesota's generally applicable rule of promissory estoppel,

17 which is only occasionally applied to First Amendment conduct. Rather, pancuronium bromide

18 inhibits public access to information every time it is used during an execution. This is not a case

19 ofthe press or the public seeking a special exemption from a "rule" that is otherwise applied

20 across-the-board; PNS challenges the "rule" in every instance it is applied.

21

The doctrine concerning neutral rules of general applicability has no relevance to PNS's

22 Complaint.

23 II

24 II

25 II

26 II

27 II

28 II

37544702

14
PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

se S:06-cv-01793-JF Document 36-1 Filed 06/20/2006 Page 19 of 19

IV. CONCLUSION

2

For the foregoing reasons, Defendants' motion to dismiss should be denied.

3 4 Dated: June 20, 2006 5 6

ACLU FOUNDAnON OF NORTHERN CALIFORNIA
KEKER & VAN NEST, LLP

7

8

By: lsi Wendy J. Thurm

WENDY 1. THURM

9

Attorneys for Plaintiff

PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE

10

II

12

13

14

IS

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

37544702

15
PLA[NT[FF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF RS

