Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document79 Filed10/07/10 Page1 of 11

1 KEKER & VAN NEST, LLP JON B. STREETER - #101970
2 WENDY J. THURM - #163558 AJAY S. KRISHNAN - #222476
3 710 Sansome Street San Francisco, CA 94111-1704
4 Telephone: (415) 391-5400 Facsimile: (415) 397-7188
5 E-mail: akrishnan@kvn.com

6 ACLU FOUNDATION OF NORTHERN CALIFORNIA ALAN L. SCHLOSSER - #49957
7 MICHAEL RISHER - #191627 39 Drumm St.
8 San Francisco, CA 94111 Telephone: (415) 621-2493
9 Facsimile: (415) 255-1478 E-mail: aschlosser@aclunc.org
10 Attorneys for Plaintiff
11 PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE

12 UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
13 NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA
14

15 PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE,
16 Plaintiff,
17 v.
18 MATTHEW CATE, Secretary of the
19 California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation; VINCENT CULLEN, Acting
20 Warden, California State Prison at San Quentin; ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER,
21 Governor, State of California; and Does 1-50,

Case No. C 06 1793 JF HRL
DEATH PENALTY CASE
SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF [42 U.S.C. § 1983]

22

Defendants.

23

24

25

26

27

28

514664.01

SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF HRL

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document79 Filed10/07/10 Page2 of 11

1

NATURE OF ACTION

2

1. This action is brought to vindicate the right of the press and the public to attend,

3 meaningfully observe, and gather and report on important information at California executions.

4 These executions are administered by the California Department of Corrections and

5 Rehabilitation and the California State Prison at San Quentin. On information and belief, these

6 institutions, along with the California Governor’s Office and perhaps others, were responsible for

7 developing the regulations that govern the method for carrying out executions by lethal injection.

8 The right at issue is guaranteed by the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States

9 Constitution and is primarily effectuated by members of the press who are actually present at

10 executions and who serve as surrogates for the press and the public at large. Plaintiff, a media

11 organization that reports on California executions, seeks temporary, preliminary, and permanent

12 injunctive relief to prevent the defendants from executing any death row inmates in a manner

13 that conceals important information to which the public is constitutionally entitled. Specifically,

14 society is constitutionally entitled to publicly observe the physical process and procedures by

15 which the State puts an executed inmate to death and how the inmate dies. Society’s

16 constitutional right includes having access to the observable physical impact of the lethal

17 procedure. Defendants’ use of pancuronium bromide, a paralytic agent that acts as a chemical

18 curtain over the lethal injection process, makes it impossible for witnesses to observe adequately

19 the dying process. This lawsuit is not a challenge to the death penalty or to all lethal-injection

20 executions. Rather, plaintiff contends that California must not execute death row inmates in a

21 manner that violates the First Amendment rights of the press and of the public. The public

22 requires information in order to make informed decisions, via democratic processes, whether

23 executions should be conducted at all, and if so, how. The First Amendment claim, therefore,

24 vindicates the public’s right of access to information related to that democratic decision-making

25 process.

26

JURISDICTION AND VENUE

27

2. This Court has jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331 (federal question),

28 § 1343 (civil rights violations), § 2201 (declaratory relief), and § 2202 (further relief). This

514664.01

1
SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF HRL

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document79 Filed10/07/10 Page3 of 11

1 action arises under the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution and

2 under 42 U.S.C. § 1983.

3

3. Venue is proper pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b) because the California State

4 Prison at San Quentin in San Quentin, California, is located in this District. All executions

5 conducted by the State of California (“State”) occur at San Quentin. The events giving rise to

6 this complaint will occur in this District.

7

THE PARTIES

8

4. Plaintiff Pacific News Service (“PNS”) is a non-profit media organization,

9 founded in 1969, that reports on, among other things, the application of the death penalty in

10 California. PNS syndicates daily stories to subscribing mainstream and community newspapers

11 across the United States. PNS stories include feature-length commentary, news analysis, and

12 investigative reporting. PNS also sponsors magazine articles, books, TV segments and films.

13 Additionally, PNS owns and operates New America Media, an association of hundreds of

14 independent news organizations that cover, at least in part, issues pertaining to ethnic or minority

15 communities. New America Media publishes content generated both internally and from its

16 member organizations. Pacific News Service is interested in disseminating information on what

17 eyewitnesses to California executions observe during an execution by lethal injection. PNS is a

18 California non-profit corporation based in San Francisco, California.

19

5. Defendant Matthew Cate is the Secretary of the California Department of

20 Corrections and Rehabilitation (“the Department”). Cate, or those under the control of the

21 Secretary of the Department, developed the regulations setting forth California’s execution

22 protocol, and are responsible for implementing it.

23

6. Defendant Vincent Cullen is the Acting Warden of the California State Prison at

24 San Quentin (“San Quentin Prison”). California death row inmates are incarcerated and

25 executed at San Quentin Prison. Cullen, or those under the control of the Warden of San

26 Question Prison, developed the regulations setting forth California’s execution protocol, and are

27 responsible for implementing it.

28

514664.01

2
SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF HRL

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document79 Filed10/07/10 Page4 of 11

1

7. Defendant Arnold Schwarzenegger is the Governor of the state of California. On

2 information and belief, his office (“the Governor’s Office”) developed, in conjunction with the

3 other Defendants, the regulations setting forth California’s execution protocol, and direct the

4 Department and San Quentin Prison in its implementation.

5

8. Plaintiff does not know the true names of Does 1-50 but alleges that they have or

6 will participate in California executions by virtue of their roles in designing, implementing,

7 and/or carrying out executions by lethal injection. When plaintiff discovers the Doe Defendants’

8 true identities, it will amend its complaint accordingly.

9

CLAIM

10 VIOLATION OF RIGHT OF ACCESS TO PUBLIC PROCEEDINGS PROTECTED BY

THE FIRST AND FOURTEENTH AMENDMENTS TO THE UNITED STATES

11

CONSTITUTION

12

(42 U.S.C. § 1983)

13

9. Under California law, death sentences shall be carried out by “administration of a

14 lethal gas or by an intravenous injection of a substance or substances in a lethal quantity

15 sufficient to cause death, by standards established under the direction of the Department of

16 Corrections.” Cal. Penal Code § 3604(a). The statute prescribes no specific drugs, dosages, drug

17 combinations, or manner of intravenous line access to be used in the execution process; nor does

18 the statute prescribe any certification, training, or licensure required of those who participate in

19 the execution process. The details of the execution process by lethal injection were determined

20 by the Department, its subsidiary, San Quentin Prison, the Governor’s Office and perhaps others.

21

10. Title 15 of the California Code of Regulations §§ 3349 – 3349.4.6 (the “Lethal

22 Injection Regulations”) set forth the lethal injection protocol adopted by the Department, after a

23 notice and comment process that is currently the subject of a separate legal dispute in California

24 state court. The Lethal Injection Regulations are the latest version of California’s lethal injection

25 procedure—formerly known as San Quentin Operational Procedure No. 770 (“Procedure

26 770”)—which has evolved since it was first adopted in the mid-1990’s. There have been three

27 recent revisions of California’s lethal injection protocol. First, the Department revised

28 Procedure 770 on March 16, 2006, following its February 21, 2006 decision to postpone

514664.01

3
SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF HRL

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document79 Filed10/07/10 Page5 of 11

1 indefinitely the execution of Michael Angelo Morales. The original version of PNS’s complaint

2 in this lawsuit challenged the March 16, 2006 version of Procedure 770. Second, Procedure 770

3 was revised again on May 15, 2007, following this Court’s issuance of its December 15, 2006

4 Notice of Intended Decision in Morales v. Cate, Case Nos. C-06-219-JF-HRL & C-06-926-JF-

5 HRL. The Notice of Intended Decision, in evaluating Mr. Morales’ Eighth Amendment claim,

6 identified numerous substantive defects with the lethal injection protocol and invited Defendants

7 to address those defects. PNS’s First Amended Complaint in this lawsuit challenged the May 15,

8 2007 version of Procedure 770. Third, Procedure 770 was superseded by the Lethal Injection

9 Regulations, following a decision by the Marin Superior Court in Morales v. CDCR, Case No.

10 CIV 061436 (Cal. Sup. Ct.), invalidating Procedure 770 for non-compliance with California’s

11 Administrative Procedures Act. The state now claims that it has complied with California’s

12 Administrative Procedures Act and that the Lethal Injection Regulations became final on

13 August 29, 2010. PNS’s current complaint, this Second Amended Complaint, challenges the

14 Lethal Injection Regulations.

15

11. California’s lethal injection protocol, in policy and practice, has remained

16 unchanged since its inception in one critical respect: It provides for execution by injection with a

17 lethal combination of three chemical substances, in the following order: first, sodium pentothal, a

18 short-acting barbiturate; second, pancuronium bromide, which paralyzes all voluntary muscles;

19 and third, potassium chloride, which causes cardiac arrest.

20

12. The intended purpose of the first drug administered in the Lethal Injection

21 Regulations, sodium pentothal (also known as sodium thiopental), is to render the inmate

22 unconscious and therefore unable to experience pain. The intended purpose of the third drug,

23 potassium chloride, is to bring about the rapid death of the inmate by stopping his heart. The

24 intended purpose of the second drug, pancuronium bromide (also known as Pavulon), is in

25 dispute and is discussed in more detail below. The parties agree, however, that one intended

26 purpose and effect of pancuronium bromide is to induce paralysis. Defendants have also

27 publicly admitted that at least one reason for using pancuronium bromide is to conceal

28 “involuntary muscle movement” with unpredictable consequences. Ultimately, Defendants have

514664.01

4
SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF HRL

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document79 Filed10/07/10 Page6 of 11

1 never provided a constitutionally legitimate and justifiable reason for administering pancuronium

2 bromide. The primary apparent function of this drug is to conceal important aspects of the

3 execution process from the press and the public.

4

13. Defendants Cate, Cullen, and Schwarzenegger, and the Doe Defendants are acting

5 under color of California law when promulgating or amending the Lethal Injection Regulations

6 and when carrying out executions.

7

14. A limited number of members of the press and the public are permitted to witness

8 executions in California. These eyewitnesses serve as surrogates for those members of the press

9 and the public who are not able to attend executions personally. Thus, the First Amendment

10 rights of the public and the press to attend and meaningfully observe executions are effectuated

11 by these surrogates.

12

15. Death row inmates have challenged the Lethal Injection Regulations and its

13 predecessor, Procedure 770, arguing that this protocol violates constitutional and statutory

14 provisions enacted to prevent cruelty, pain, and torture. As a result, the issue of whether

15 California’s lethal injection protocol illegally subjects death row inmates to an undue risk of a

16 painful death has received substantial media attention in California and nationwide, and is of

17 great interest to the public. When the Department was drafting the current regulations it received

18 more than 20,000 comments from members of the public, which also shows the intensity of the

19 public’s interest in executions by lethal injection.

20

16. Members of the press and the public who witness executions at San Quentin are

21 unable to observe and report on significant aspects of the execution process historically observed

22 by eyewitnesses and reported to the public at large. This is because pancuronium bromide, the

23 second drug in the lethal injection cocktail, paralyzes all movement of the inmate’s voluntary

24 muscle fibers.

25

17. One example of information that the public historically had access to when

26 viewing executions is the process of dying. Historically, members of the public had the ability to

27 observe the manner in which the executed inmate’s body responded to those instrumentalities

28 that brought about his death. For instance, during executions by the firing squad, hanging, and

514664.01

5
SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF HRL

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document79 Filed10/07/10 Page7 of 11

1 electrocution, witnesses were historically able to see the way in which the inmate’s body

2 responded to the lethal apparatus or instrumentality. As the Ninth Circuit put it, “The public and

3 press historically have been allowed to watch the condemned inmate enter the execution place,

4 be attached to the execution device and then die.” California First Amendment Coalition v.

5 Woodford, 299 F.3d 868, 876 (9th Cir. 2002). The use of pancuronium bromide during the lethal

6 injection process—as mandated by the Lethal Injection Regulations—prevents society from

7 watching, in a meaningful way, executed inmates die.

8

18. Another example of information that is concealed from the public as a result of

9 pancuronium bromide is information about the humaneness of the lethal injection process—

10 namely, whether the inmate experiences pain, and if so, how much. A major controversy

11 surrounding the California’s lethal injection protocol focuses on whether the inmate is properly

12 anaesthetized before dying. Specifically, a substantial question has been raised as to whether

13 that protocol ensures adequate delivery of sodium pentothal to the inmate. In past and current

14 challenges to the Lethal Injection Regulations and Procedure 770, inmates have alleged

15 shortcomings in the protocol, suggesting that prior California executions performed under

16 Procedure 770 actually subjected inmates to excruciating pain. But the inclusion of pancuronium

17 bromide in the protocol renders the inmate incapable of showing any pain: his body will remain

18 motionless whether or not he experiences pain. The pancuronium bromide will suppress

19 important information, including both physical reactions of the body, such as voluntary or

20 involuntary coordinated muscle movement, and verbal indicia of pain. As a result, pancuronium

21 bromide acts as a chemical curtain that conceals indicia of pain from the members of the press

22 and the public that are observing the executions.

23

19. Importantly, pancuronium bromide conceals important information from members

24 of the press and the public whether pain is present or absent. If the inmate does experience pain,

25 execution witnesses will not be able to observe the inmate’s physical indicia of pain because of

26 the inmate’s paralysis. If the inmate is completely anaesthetized and does not experience pain,

27 execution witnesses will not be able to determine whether the lack of any physical response is a

28 result of pancuronium bromide or of unconsciousness. Thus, pancuronium bromide masks

514664.01

6
SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF HRL

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document79 Filed10/07/10 Page8 of 11

1 important information about the presence or absence of pain.

2

20. Additionally, pancuronium bromide masks both disputed and undisputed indicia

3 of pain or consciousness. In the lawsuits brought by death row inmates challenging Procedure

4 770 and in the larger social debate, there are often disputes as to whether or not an inmate’s

5 physical responses during the execution process indicate that the inmate was conscious and

6 experienced pain while dying. For instance, litigants and interested members of society regularly

7 debate whether prolonged lethal injection executions, where breathing persists several minutes

8 after the anesthetic is administered, constitute evidence of a botched execution. Pancuronium

9 bromide conceals from members of the public viewing executions both types of physical

10 responses—those that could and could not be reasonably disputed as indicia of pain. The press

11 and the public are entitled to witness, interpret, and report on both types of physical responses.

12 Thus, the First Amendment right protects access to information that may or may not be relevant

13 to a Court’s determination as to whether or not an inmate experiences pain.

14

21. The Lethal Injection Regulations also prevent the witnesses from using auditory

15 information to evaluate the execution process. In past executions that used a curtain to hide

16 portions of an execution—such as the 1992 execution of Rickey Ray Rector in Arkansas—media

17 witnesses who were prevented from seeing the execution were nonetheless able to report that

18 they had heard the prisoner moaning in pain, apparently as the executioners attempted to insert

19 IV lines. Pancuronium bromide would prevent a prisoner from verbally expressing any pain that

20 occurred after it was administered. In addition, the Lethal Injection Regulations incorporate a

21 new information-management provision: the new execution chamber contains a microphone that

22 allows witnesses to hear what is occurring in the chamber, but this microphone is to be switched-

23 off immediately before the chemicals are administered. 15 C.C.R. § 3349.4.5(f)(5). On

24 information and belief, this will prevent witnesses from hearing whether the prisoner expresses

25 pain and also any statements by execution-team members that indicate whether the execution is

26 proceeding according to plan.

27

22. Aside from the issue of pain, society also has an interest in observing portions of

28 the execution process that could be perceived as undignified or inhumane. As an example, the

514664.01

7
SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF HRL

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document79 Filed10/07/10 Page9 of 11

1 guillotine, as a method of execution, may well be painless. Nonetheless, society has an interest

2 in observing the physical effect of a guillotine on the body of an executed inmate because many

3 members of society may find these effects to be undignified or inhumane.

4

23. Finally, there is still other socially relevant information—unrelated to the process

5 of dying, indicia of pain, and humaneness or indignity—that may be important to the public. For

6 instance, while fighting off the effects of the sedative, sodium pentothal, an inmate may attempt

7 to express sentiments or information unrelated to pain, such as repentance, confession, anger, or

8 defiance. The First Amendment right of the public and the press encompasses these types of

9 information as well.

10

24. Either pancuronium bromide serves no legitimate functional or penological

11 purpose in the lethal injection protocol, or any incidental legitimate function that it does serve is

12 outweighed by its effect of concealing information that the First Amendment protects.

13 Pancuronium bromide does not meaningfully affect consciousness or the perception of pain.

14 And, when administered as provided for in the Lethal Injection Regulations, it does not hasten

15 death. Thus, pancuronium bromide appears to serve no purpose other than concealing important

16 information about the execution process from the public and the press. Defendants know that

17 pancuronium bromide’s only function is to conceal information, but they continue to administer

18 the drug despite this knowledge.

19

25. Defendants therefore intentionally administer pancuronium bromide to conceal

20 important information from the press and the public. This would not be the first time that

21 defendants and their predecessors incorporated into the lethal injection process procedures

22 intentionally aimed at concealing important information from those viewing the execution.

23 Specifically, in California First Amendment Coalition v. Woodford, 299 F.3d 868 (9th Cir.

24 2002), the plaintiff media organization challenged the San Quentin Prison and Department policy

25 of drawing a physical curtain in front of the lethal injection chamber while prison guards

26 strapped down the inmate and inserted intravenous lines into his arms. On the basis of an

27 internal Department of Corrections memo, the district court found and the Ninth Circuit affirmed

28 that “Procedure 770 was motivated, at least in part, by a concern that the strapping of a

514664.01

8
SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF HRL

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document79 Filed10/07/10 Page10 of 11

1 condemned inmate, the injection of intravenous lines or other aspects of a lethal injection

2 execution would be perceived as brutal by the public and thus was, to that extent, prompted by

3 considerations other than legitimate concerns for prison personnel safety.” California First

4 Amendment Coalition, 299 F.3d at 880.

5

ALLEGATIONS IN SUPPORT OF DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF

6

26. The inclusion of pancuronium bromide in the Lethal Injection Regulations

7 necessarily impacts Plaintiff’s First and Fourteenth Amendment rights. Pancuronium bromide

8 prevents the press and the public from obtaining various categories of information, including

9 information about the dying process, about pain, about the humaneness and dignity of the

10 process, and about still other information that society values. The press and the public are

11 entitled to each of these types of information, all of which are masked by the Legal Injection

12 Regulations. Additionally, Defendants administer pancuronium bromide with the intention of

13 concealing information from the press and the public. This conduct violates plaintiff’s First and

14 Fourteenth Amendment rights to meaningfully witness and obtain information at executions.

15

27. The Lethal Injection Regulations result in irreparable injury to plaintiff PNS

16 because the information suppressed and concealed by the protocol can never be reacquired.

17

28. This complete and permanent loss of socially valuable information to the press

18 and to the public cannot be redressed by legal remedies.

19

29. Defendants’ prior intentional attempts to conceal information about the execution

20 process from the press and the public weigh in favor of injunctive relief.

21

30. An actual controversy exists between plaintiff and defendants as to whether the

22 Lethal Injection Regulations violate plaintiffs’ First Amendment rights.

23

24

PRAYER FOR RELIEF

25

WHEREFORE, plaintiff Pacific News Service prays for:

26

1. A declaration of the First Amendment rights of plaintiff;

27

2. Temporary, preliminary, and permanent injunctive relief to enjoin the defendants,

28 their officers, agents, servants, employees, and all persons acting in concert with them from

514664.01

9
SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF HRL

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document79 Filed10/07/10 Page11 of 11

1 employing an execution procedure that conceals important information to which plaintiff and the

2 public are constitutionally entitled;

3

3. Reasonable attorneys’ fees pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and the laws of the

4 United States;

5

4. Costs of suit; and

6

5. Any such other relief as the Court deems just and proper.

7 Dated: October 6, 2010 8 9

ACLU FOUNDATION OF NORTHERN CALIFORNIA
KEKER & VAN NEST, LLP

10

By: /s/ Wendy J. Thurm

11

WENDY J. THURM

Attorneys for Plaintiff

12

PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

514664.01

10
SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF CASE NO. C 06 1793 JF HRL

