1 KEKER & VAN NEST, LLP JON B. STREETER - #101970
2 WENDY J. THU - #163558
AlA Y S. KRSHNAN - #222476
3 KATHERI J. FLOREY - #241647
71 0 Sansome Street 4 San Francisco, CA 94111-1704
Telephone: (415) 391-5400
5 Facsimile: (415) 397-7188
E-mail: jstreeter~kv.com
6
ACLU FOUNATION OF NORTHERN CALIFORN 7 ALAN SCHLOSSER - #49957
MICHAL RISHER - #191627
8 i 663 Mission, Suite 460
San Francisco, CA 94103
9 Telephone: (415) 621-2493
Facsimile: (415) 255-1478
10 E-mail: aschlosser~ac1unc.org
11 Attorneys for Plaintiff PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE
12
13 UNTED STATES DISTRICT COURT
14 NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA

15

16 II PA.CIFIC l-ffV1S SERVICE,

17

Plaintiff,

18

v.

19 JEAN WOODFORD, Acting Secretar of
the Californa Deparent of Corrections and
20 Rehabilitation; STEVEN ORNOSKI, Warden, California State Prison at San Quentin, San
21 Quentin, CA; and Does 1-50,

CaseNo.
COMPLAINT FOR DECLARTORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF
(42 V.S.C. § 1983)

22

Defendants.

23

24

25

26

27

28

368536.05

COMPLAIT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUCTIVE RELIEF CASE NO.

1

NATURE OF ACTION.

2

1.

This- action is brought pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 to vindicate the right of the

3 press and the public to attend, meanngfully observe, and gather and report on important

4 information at executions adminstered by the Californa Deparent of Corrections and

5 Rehabilitation and the Californa State Prison at San Quentin. This right is guaranteed by the
6 First and Foureenth Amendments ofthe United States Constitution and is primarly effectuated 7 by members of the press who are actually present at executions and who serve as surogates for

8 the press and the public at large. Plaintiff, a media organzation that reports on

Californa

9 executions, seeks temporar, preliminary, and permanent injunctive relief to prevent the

10 defendants from executing any death row inmates in a maner that conceals important

11 information to which the public is constitutionally entitled. Defendants' use of

pan cur onium

12 bromide, a paralytic agent that acts as a chemical curain over the lethal injection process, makes

13 it impossible for witnesses to determine whether death row inmates in California are being'

14 subjected to substantial and unecessar pain before dying. Pancuronium bromide also conceals

1. other aspects ofthe, dying process about which the public is entitled to know. This lawsuit is not

16 a bhuiket challenge to the death penalty or to all lethal injection executions. Rather, plaintiff

17 contends that Californa may not execute death row inmates in a maner that violates the First

18 Amendment rights of

the press and

of the public. The public requires information in order to

19 decide via democratic processes whether and how executions should be conducted. The First

20 Amendment claim, therefore, vindicates the public's right

to gather information related to that'

21 decision-making process.
22 JURISDICTION AND VENUE

23

2. This Cour has jursdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331 (federal question),

24 § 1343 (civil rights violations), § 2201 (declaratory relief), and § 2202 (fuer relief). This

25 action arses under the First and Foureenth Amendments to the United States Constitution and

26 under 42 U.S.C. § 1983.

27

3.

Venue is proper pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1391

(b) because the California State

28 Prison at San Quentin in San Quentin, Californa, is located in this District. All executions

368536.05

1
COMPLAIT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUCTIVE RELIEF

1 conducted by the State of Californa ("State") occur at San Quentin. The events giving rise to 2 this complaint wil occur in this District.
3 THE PARTIES

4

4. Plaintiff Pacific News Service ("PNS") is a non-profit media organization,

5 founded in 1969, that reports on, among other things, the application of

the death penalty in

6 California. PNS syndicates daily stories through the AssocÍated Press wire to subscribing

7 mainstream and community newspapers across the United States. PNS stories include feature-

8 length commentary, news analysis, and investigative reporting. PNS also sponsors magazine

9 aricles, books, TV segments and films. Additionally, PNS owns and operates New America

10 Media, an association of hundreds of independent news organzations that cover, at least in part,

11 issues pertaining to ethnic or minority communties. New America Media publishes content

12 generated both internally and from its member organzations. Pacific News Service is interested

13 in disseminating information on what eyewitnesses to Californa executions observe durng the

14 lethal injection process, including but notlimited to whether executed inmates manfest indicia

15 of pain prior to death. PNS is a Californa non-profit corporation based in San Francisco, 16 Califorriia.

17

5. Defendant Jeane S. Woodford is the Acting Secretary ofthe Californa

18 Deparment of Corrections and Rehabilitation ("the Department").

19

6.

Defendant Steven Ornoski is the Warden of

the California State Prison at San

20 Quentin, where the plaintiff

is incarceráted and where the plaintiff's execution is scheduled to

21 occur.

22

7. Plaintiff does not know the true names of Does 1-50 but alleges that they have or

23 will paricipate in plaintiff's execution by virte of

their roles in designing, implementing, and/or

24 carng out the lethal injection process. When plaintiff discovers the Doe Defendants' tre

25 identities, it wil amend its complaint accordingly.

26

27

28

368536.05

COMPLAINT FOR DE

2
CLARA TORY AND INJUCTIVE RELIEF

1 CLAIM

2 VIOLATION OF RIGHT TO BE PRESENT AT, MEANINGFULLY WITNESS, GATHER INFORMATION AT, AND REPORT ON EXECUTIONS PURSUANT TO
3 THE FIRST AND FOURTEENTH AMENDMENTS TO THE UNITED STATES
CONSTITUTION 4

(42 U.S.C. § 1983)
5
8. Under California law, death sentences shall be carred out by "administration of a
6
lethal gas or by an intravenous injection of a substance or substances in a lethal quàntity

7
suffcient to cause death, by standards established under the direction ofthe Deparent of

8
Corrections." Cal. Penal Code § 3604(a). The statute prescribes no specific drgs, dosages, drug
9
combinations, or the maner of intravenous line access to be used in the execution process; nor
10
does the statute prescribe any certification, training, or licensure required of those who

11

12

paricipate in the execution process. All of

the details ofthe execution process are to be

determined by the Deparment of Corrections and Rehabilitation.

13

9. Since it first adopted a lethal injection protocol in the mid-1990's, the Deparment

14

of Corrections and

Rehabilitation has refused to disclose to the public a complete version ofthe

15

protocol. Additionally, the Department conducts substantial portions oflethal injection

16 i

executions outside of public view and without public disclosure. Thus, although plaintiff is

17

familiar with those signficant aspects ofthe lethal injection protocol and the conduct oflethal

18
injection executions that have been disclosed, plaintiff lacks complete and precise knowledge of
19

(1) the protocol the Departent has adopted; (2) changes to the protocol over time; and (3) 20
whether and to what extent the Departent abides by its own protocol when conducting lethal
21
injection executions. 22

10. On information and belief, San Quentin Operational Procedure No. 770
23

("Procedure 770") is the lethal injection protocol adopted by the Departent and has evolved 24
since it was first adopted in the mid-1990's. Most recently, the Deparment revised Procedure
25

26

770 after its February 21,2006 decision to indefinitely postpone the execution of

Michael

Angelo Morales. The Deparment outlined the revision in skeleton form in a March 3, 2006

27

28

368536.05

3 COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUCTIVE RELIEF

1 Case Management Conference Statement, fied in Morales v. Woodford, No. C 06 219 IF (N.D.

2 Cal. Jan. 18, 2006), a case curently pending in this Cour.

3

11. On information and belief, Procedure 770, in policy and practice, has remained

4 unchanged since its inception in one critical respect: It provides for execution by injection with a

5 lethal combination of

three chemical substances, in

the following order: first, sodium pentothal, a'

6 short-acting barbituate; second, pancuronium bromide, which paralyzes all voluntar muscles;

7 and third, potassium chloride, which causes cardiac arest.1

8

12.

The intended purose of

the first drg administered in Procedure 770, sòdium

9 pentothal (also known as sodium thiopental), is to render the inmate unconscious and therefore

10 unable to expenence pain. The intended purpose of the third drg, potassium chloride, is to

11 brigabòut the rapid death ofthe inmate by stopping his heart. The intended purose ofthe

12 second drg, pancuronium bromide (also known as Pavulon), is in dispute and is discussed in

13 more detail below. On information and belief, plaintiff alleges that defendants have never

14 provided a legitimate reason for administering pancuronium bromide and that this drug fuctions

15 only to conceal important aspects ofthe execution process from the press and the public.

16

13. Defenda.'1ts Jeanne \Voodford and Steven Omoski, a.'1d Doe Defendants are acting

17 under color of Californa law when promulgating or amending Procedure 770 and when caring

18 out executions.

19

14. A limited number of members of the press and the public are permitted to witness

20 executions. These eyewitnesses serve as surogates for those members of the press and the

21 public who are not able to attend executions personally. Thus, the First Amendment rights of

the

22 public and the press to attend and meaningfully observe executions are effectuated by these

23 surogates.

24

25 1 On information and belief, one potential deviation from this series of drgs took place on

26

February 21,2006, in connection with the execution of

Michael Angelo Morales. On

information and belief, on that day, the Deparment contemplated executing Mr. Morales using 27 only sodium pentothal so as to comply with a condition, imposed in Morales v. Woodford, No. C

06219 JF, for proceeding with the execution. On information and belief, this contemplated 28 revision was never implemented.

368536.05

4 COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUCTIVE RELIEF

.

¡

1

15.

Death row inates have challenged

Procedure 770, arguing that this protocol,

2 violates constitutional and statutory provisions enacted to prevent cruelty, pain, and torte. As a

3 result, the issue of

whether Procedure 770 ilegally subjects death row inmates to an undue risk

4 of a painful death has received substantial media attention and is of great interest to the public.

5

16. A major controversy surounding Procedure 770 focuses on whether the inmate is

6 properly anaesthetized before dying. Specifically, a substantial question has been raised as to

7 whether Procedure 770 ensures adequate delivery of

sodium pentothal to the inmate's veins. In

8 past challenges to the protocol, inmates have alleged shortcomings in Procedure 770 a.'ld have

9 presented evidence suggesting that prior Californa executions performed under Procedure 770

10 actually subjected inmates to excruciating pain. Defendants ~oodford and Ornoski dispute the

11. allegation that Procedure 770 is flawed as well as the evidence that they or their predecessors

12 have improperly administered the protocol.

13

17. Members of the press and the public who witness executions at San Quentin are

14 unable to observe aspects ofthe execution process historically observed by eyewitnesses ànd

15 reported to the public at large, including, but not limited to, whether the three-drg cocktail .

16 subj ects iP..1Tates to ~"tconstitutionalleveis of pain due to inadequate 3.1'esthesia. TliIs is because

17 pancuronium bromide, the second drg in the lethal injection cocktail, paralyzes all voluntar

18 muscle movement in the inmate. Thus, whether or not the inmate is experiencing pain, his body

19 would remain still and would be incapable of manifesting any pain that is felt. These physical

20 manfestations of

pain include both physical reactions of

the body, such as voluntar or

21 involuntar coordinated muscle movement, and verbal indicia of pain. As a result, pancuronium

22 bromide acts as a chemical curain that conceals indicia of pain from the members ofthe press

23 and the public that are observing the executions.

24

18. Importantly, pancuronium bromide conceals important information from members

25 of

the press and the public whether pain is present or absent. If

the inmate does experience pain,

26 execution witnesseS'

wil not be able to observe the inmate's physicalindicia of

pain because of

27 the inmate's paralysis. If

the inmate is completely anaesthetized and.does not experience pain,

28 execution witnesses wil not be able to determine that either, because the lack of any physical

368536.05 COMPLAIT FOR DECLARTORY

5
AND INJUCTIV RELIEF

1 response will be attbuted to pancuronium bromide, not unconsciousness. Thus, pancuronium

2 bromide masks important information about the presence or absence of pain.

3

19. Additionally, pancuronium bromide masks both disputed and undisputed indicia

4 of pain or consciousness. In the lawsuits brought by death row inmates challenging Procedure
5 770 and in the larger social debate, there are often disputes as to whether certain physical
6 responses durng the lethal injection process by previously executed inmates actually indicate

7 that the inate was conscious and experienced pain while dying. Pancuronium bromide

8 conceals from members of

the public viewing executions both I'fPes of

physical responses-

9 those that could

and could not be reasonably disputed as indicia of pain. The press and

the

10 public are entitled to witness, interpret, and report on both tyes of physical responses.

11

20. Finally, entirely aside from the issue of pain, pancuronium bromide conceals

12 aspects of

the execution process that may be important to the public. For instance, while fighting

13 off the effects of the sedative, sodium pentothal, an inmate may attempt to express sentiments or

14 information unelated to pain, such as repentance or anger. The First Amendment right ofthe

15 public and the press encompasses many types of information in which society may be interested,
1 h. ~nt m",..",h7 thOS'" as"nl"1aterl "71th the 'S""'" nf'pa'" 'ThllS tli'" "nh1,1" "'"d th'" """'S8 "'..'" "'..t,t1"'r1 t'"
.1 v I .L.lV\..1 .IV.. -l.1J \..1.1 "" i.VV.l" U. ,." .1U.. 1..1.1 .I ~u."" '-.1 .1.1....1 .1.1" , L .I"" ,PUVJ..1V u..i \".1..\" l'.l "" u. "" lo.L.U..1LJ.,"U V

17 information unelated to pain that is being concealed by pancuronium bromide.

18

21. On information and belief, pancuronium bromide serves no legitimate fuctional

19 or penological purose in the lethal injection protocol. On information and belief, pancuronium

20 bromide does not affect consciousness, the perception of pain, or the hastening of death. Thus,

21 when administered as provided for in

Procedure 770, pancuronium bromide appears to serve no

22 purose other than concealing important information about the execution process from the public

23 and the press. On information and belief, defendants know that pancuronium bromide's only

24 fuction is to conceal information, but defendants continue to administer the drg despite this

25 knowledge.

26

22. On information and belief, defendants therefore intentionally administer

27 pancuronium bromide to conceal important information from the press and the public. This

28 would not be the first time that defendants and their predecessors incorporated into the lethal

368536.05

6 COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUCTIVE RELIEF

,

1 injection process procedures intentionally aimed at concealing important information from those
2 viewing the execution. Specifically, in California First Amendment Coalition v. Woodford, 299

3 F.3d 868 (9th Cir. 2002)i the plaintiff

media organization challenged the.

San Quentin Prison and

4 Deparentpolicy of drawing a physical curain in front of

the. lethal injection chamber while

5 prison guards strapped down the inmate and inserted intravenous lines into his ars. On the

6 basis of an internal Department of Corrections memo, the district cour found and the Ninth
7 Circuit affirmed that "Procedure 770 was motivated, at least in part, by a concern that the 8 strapping of a condemned inate, the injection of intravenous lines or other aspects of a lethal 9 injection execution would be perceived as brutal by the public and thus was, to that extent,
10 prompted by considerations other than legitimate concerns for prison personnel safety."
11 California First Amendment Coalition, 299 F.3d at 880.
12 ALLEGATIONS IN SUPPORT OF DECLARTORY AN INJUNCTIV RELIEF

13

23. The inclusion of pancuronium bromide in Procedure 770 necessarly impacts

14 plaintiff's First and Foureenth Amendment rights. Whether or not the lethal injection procedure

15 subjects the inmate to pain, pancuronium bromide prevents the press and the public from

1.. -nIIn-h..t'a"i.'m. ..'.1.b10....t.h. ,.s...,..l.1._fn..r..r.a..t.,.n..n._p....,.l.1a(.'.n._rn-.mv.J'n\m.....b.rLnVm.l;i,.l.".,I'-aVls_n v"n"",v'''ieiva1.Is..It;'-n.Im.l "t'.h1."1,\"0'''p''iS.'"Su'.li"""d1.t\h, oP,u.,u"i..Ii;c
17 disputed indicia of pain and aspects of the execution process unelated to pain. The press and the

18 public are entitled to each of

these types of

information, all of

which are masked by pancuronium

19 bromide. Additionally, defendants administer pancuronium bromide with the intention of

20 concealing information from the press and the public. This

conduct violates plaintiff's First and

21 Foureenth Amendment rights to meaningfully witness and obtain information at executions.

22

24. Procedure 770 results in irreparable injur to plaintiffPNS because the

23 information suppressed and concealed by the

protocol can never be reacquired.

24

25. This complete and permanent loss of socially valuable information to the press

25 and to the public canot be redressed by legal remedies.

26

26. Defendants' prior intentional attempts to conceal information about the execution

27 process from the press and the public weigh in favor of injunctive relief.

28

368536.05

7 COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUCTIVE RELIEF

1

27.

An actual controversy exists between plaintiff and defendants as to

2 Procedure 770 violates plaintiffs' First Amendment rights.

whether

3
4 PRAYER FOR RELIEF

5 WHEREFORE, plaintiff

Pacific News Service prays for:

6

1. A declaration of the First Amendment rights of plaintiff;

7

2.

Temporar, preliminary, and permanent injunctive relief

to enjoin the defendants,

8 their officers, agents, servants, employees, and all persons acting in concert with them from

9 employing an execution procedute that conceals important information to which plaintiff and the

10 public are constitutionally entitled;

11

3. Reasonable attorneys' fees pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and the laws ofthe

12 United States;

13

.4. Costs of suit; and

14

5. Any such other relief as the Court deems just and proper.

15

16 II Dated: March 8, 2006 17
18

A.CLU FOUNA.TION OF
NORTHERN CALIFORN
KEKER & VAN NEST, LLP

19

20

NB. STREET R

21

Attorneys for Plaintiff

PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE 22

23

24

25

26

27

28

368536.05

8
COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AN INJUCTIVE RELIEF

