Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document125 Filed04/05/12 Page1 of 2

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

9

FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA

10

SAN FRANCISCO DIVISION

11

12 Michael Angelo MORALES et al.,

13

Plaintiffs,

14

v.

15 Matthew CATE, Secretary of the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation,
16 et al.,

Case Number 3-6-cv-219-RS-HRL Case Number 3-6-cv-926-RS-HRL
DEATH-PENALTY CASE
ORDER DENYING PLAINTIFFS’ MOTION TO VACATE
[Doc. No. 533]

17

Defendants.

18 PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE,

19

Plaintiff,

20

v.

21 Matthew CATE, Secretary of the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation,
22 et al.,

23

Defendants.

Case Number 3-6-cv-1793-RS-HRL
DEATH-PENALTY CASE
ORDER DENYING PLAINTIFFS’ MOTION TO VACATE
[motion not on this action’s docket]

24

25

On November 3, 2011, the Court entered a scheduling order in the present actions, which

26 involve challenges to the constitutionality of the State of California’s protocol for executions by

27 lethal injection; the schedule includes a discovery cut-off date of August 15, 2012. (Morales I,

28 Doc. No. 531; Morales II, Doc. No. 74; Pac. News Serv., Doc. No. 124.) Subsequently, in

Case Nos. 3-6-cv-219-RS-HRL, 3-6-cv-926-RS-HRL, & 3-6-cv-1793-RS-HRL ORDER DENYING PLAINTIFFS’ MOTION TO VACATE (DPSAGOK)

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document125 Filed04/05/12 Page2 of 2

1 related state-court litigation, the Marin Superior Court, on state-law grounds, enjoined

2 executions pursuant to that protocol; the state court entered judgment in that case on February

3 23, 2012. Sims v. Cal. Dep’t of Corr. & Rehab., No. CIV 1004019 (Cal. Super. Ct. Marin Cnty.

4 filed Aug. 2, 2010).

5

Plaintiffs move the Court to vacate the current scheduling order, and to direct the parties

6 to submit a new proposed schedule “when viable lethal injection regulations are in place.”

7 (Morales I, Doc. No. 533 at 2.) Defendants take no position on the motion. (Id.)

8

It is unclear whether the Sims litigation has concluded and how precisely that case will

9 affect the present actions.1 Plaintiffs’ motion therefore appears to be premature. In addition, the

10 Court is concerned that the absence of a schedule may result in undue and unnecessary delay in

11 the resolution of the instant actions. Accordingly, the Court denies Plaintiffs’ motion.

12

At the same time, the Court does not intend for the parties to engage in discovery that

13 may become moot and therefore wasteful. Accordingly, the Court is presently staying discovery

14 in these actions. The parties shall file a joint statement containing a proposed schedule or

15 schedules by July 16, 2012.

16

It is so ordered.

17

18

19 DATED: April 5, 2012 20

__________________________________ RICHARD SEEBORG United States District Judge

21

22

23

24

25

1 It is similarly unclear how another related action, this one in Federal District Court in the

26 District of Columbia, may affect the present actions. California’s lethal-injection protocol requires the
use of sodium thiopental, yet it appears that that court has ordered that the California Department of

27 Corrections and Rehabilitation must turn over its supply of sodium thiopental to the FDA. Beaty v. FDA,
No. 1-11-cv-289-RJL, slip op. at 2 (D.D.C. Mar. 27, 2012) (Order, Doc. No. 24); see id. (Mem. Op., Doc.

28 No. 23).

2
Case Nos. 3-6-cv-219-RS-HRL, 3-6-cv-926-RS-HRL, & 3-6-cv-1793-RS-HRL ORDER DENYING PLAINTIFFS’ MOTION TO VACATE (DPSAGOK)

