Case 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 2 Filed 03/08/2006 Page 1 of 4

1 KEKER & VAN NEST, LLP
JON B. STREETER - #101970
2 WENDY J. THU - #163558
AJA Y S. KRSHNAN - #222476
3 KATHERI J. FLOREY - # 241647
710 Sansome Street

4 San Francisco, CA 94111-1704
Telephone: (415) 391-5400
5 Facsimile: (415) 397-7188 E-mail: jstreeter~kvn.com

6

ACLU FOUNATION OF

NORTHERN CALIFORN

7 ALAN SCHLOSSER - # 49957

MICHAEL RISHER - #191627

8 1663 Mission, Suite 460
San Francisco, CA 94103

9 Telephone: (415) 621-2493

Facsimile: (415) 255,.1478

10 E-mail: aschlosser~ac1unc.org

11 Attorneys for Plaintiff PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE
12

13

14

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

15

NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA

16 II

17

18 PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE,

Case No.

19

Plaintiff,

20

v.

21 JEAN WOODFORD, Acting Secretary of
the Californa Deparent of Corrections; 22 STEVEN W. ORNOSKI, Warden San Quentin
State Prison, San Quentin, CA, and Does 1-50,
23
Defendants. 24

NOTICE OF RELATED CASE; MOTION TO RELATE THIS CASE WITH MORALES Jí WOODFORD, CASE NOS. C
06 219 JF and C 06 926 JF RS

25

26

27

28

367872.01

NOTICE OF RELATED CASE; MOTION TO RELATE CASES CASE NO.

Case 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 2 Filed 03/08/2006 Page 2 of 4

1 . Pursuant to Civil L.R. 3-12, Plaintiff

Pacific News Service ("PNS") gives notice that

2 Pacifc News Service v. Woodford, et al., Case No.

, is related to Morales v.

3 Woodford, et al., Case Nos. C 06 219 JF and C 06 926 JF RS. PNS hereby moves to relate

4 Pacifc News Service to Morales, a case curently before Judge FogeL. Plaintiff

Michael Angelo

5 Morales does not oppose this motion. See Decl. of Wendy Thur in Supp. of PI. PNS' Motions

6 to Relate Cases, Consolidate, and Shorten Time, ir 10.
7 Pacifc New Service is related to Morales because (1) both cases concern the same

8 "transaction or event," namely the execution of death row inmates under San Quentin
9 Operational Procedure 770 ("Procedure 770"), and (2) conducting the cases before different 10 judges would result in "an unduly burdensome duplication of labor and expense." Civil L.R. 3-
11 12(a).
12 Pacifc News Service raises a challenge to San Quentin Operational Procedure 770
13 ("Procedure 770"), the lethal injection protocol used in Californa executions, based on the First

14 Amendment right of

the press and the public to attend, meanngfully

witness, gather important

15 information at, and report on executions. Plaintiff

Pacific News Service alleges that the use of

16 i pancuropju."l bromide, the second drug ad.-linistered uiider Procedure 770, f.ictIons solely as a

17 "chemical curain" whose purpose is to conceal important information about the execution (such

18 as whether the inmate is or is not experiencing substantial pain) from the members ofthe press

19 and the public viewing the execution.

20 Pacifc News Service and Morales concern the same "transaction or event." Civil L.R. at

21 3-12(a)(1). Both cases raise facial challenges to San Quentin Operational Procedure 770

22 ("Procedure 770"), Californa's method for executing death row inmates. The execution of

Mr.

23 Morales pursuant to Procedure 770 will violate both the claimed Eighth Amendment Rights of

24 Mr. Morales and the claimed First Amendment Rights ofPacific News Service. The same

25 defendants are named in both cases. Additionally, both cases challenge California's

26 administration of

pan cur onium bromide durng the lethal injection procedure.

27 That the cases share a common factual basis is made evident by the Ninth Circuit's

28 evaluation of a similar First Amendment claim in Beardslee v. Woodford, 395 F.3d 1064 (9th

1
367872.01 NOTICE OF RELATED ,CASCEA; SMEOTINONO.TO RELATE CASES

Case 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 2 Filed 03/08/2006 Page 3 of 4

1 Cir.2005). Beardslee v. Woodford, No. C 04 5381 JF, was a case to which Morales Was related.

2 In Beardslee, another case involving an inmate's Eighth Amendment challenge to Procedure

3 770, the Ninth Circuit focused on the state's lack of

justification for using pancuronium bromide

4 - an issue that is central to PNS' claim. 395 F.3d at 1075-76. Additionally, although that cour

5 did not decide the First Amendment claim because it was only raised in an amicus brief for the

6 first time on appeal, the court nonetheless notedthat the claim "may have merit." Id.at 1076

7 n.14.

8 Moreover, there wil be "an unduly burdensome duplication of labor and expense" if

9 these cases are conducted before different

judges. Civil L.R. at 3-12(a)(1). First, Judge Fogel

10 has already spent considerable time familiarzing himself

with Procedure 770, the chemical

11 pancuronium bromide, and the varousIndicia of

pain durng a lethal injection execution in

12 Morales, as well as in Cooper v. Rimmer, No. C 04436 JF, and Beardslee v.Woodford, No. C 04

13 5381 JF, where the same issues were raised. Conducting Pacifc News Service before a different

14' judge would therefore entail the duplicative expenditue of

judicial resources and labor. .

15 Second, because PNS seeks to consolidate Pacifc News Service with Morales for

16 i plLrposes of discovery and an evidentia.ry hea."¡ng, relating Pactlic .7Iews Service to Morales is a

17 necessary step to realizing the substantial efficiencies consolidation would bring. Specifically,

18 plaintiffs in Morales and Pacifc News Service are likely to seek similar discovery and present

19 similar evidence to the Cour. For example, both PNS and Mr. Morales are likely to seek

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

substantial

labor and expense will be avoided by deciding these disputes before a single judge

28 and in a single proceeding.

36787201

2 NOTICE OF RELATED CASE; MOTION TO RELATE CASES
CASE NO.

Case 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 2 Filed 03/08/2006 Page 4 of 4

1 For these reasons, PlaintiffPNS respectfully requests that the Cour enter an order

2 relating Pacifc News Service, Case No.

to Morales, Case Nos. C 06219 JF and

3 C 06 926 JF RS.

4 Dated: March 8, 2006 5 6

ACLU FOUNATION OF NORTHERN CALIFORN
KEKER& VAN NEST, LLP

7 8

~~ By: WE Y.T

9

Attorneys for Plaintiff

PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 II

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

367872.01

3 NOTICE OF RELATED CASE; MOTION TO RELATE CASES
CASE NO.

Case 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 4 Filed 03/08/2006 Page 1 of 5

1 KEKER & VAN NEST, LLP JON B. STREETER - #101970
2 WENDY J. THU - #163558
AJAY S. KRSHNAN - #222476
3 KATHERI FLOREY - # 241647
710 Sansome Street
4 San Francisco, CA 94111-1704
Telephone: (415) 391-5400
5 Facsimile: (415) 397-7188
E-mail: jstreeter(êkv.com 6
ACLU FOUNATION OF NORTHERN CALIFORN 7 ALAN SCHLOSSER - #49957
MICHAL RISHER - #191627
8 1663 Mission, Suite 460
San Francisco, CA 94103
9 Telephone: (415) 621-2493
Facsimile: (415) 255-1478
10 E-mail: aschlosser(êac1unc.org
11 Attorneys for Plaitiffs PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE
12

13

14

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

15

NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORN

16
18 Plaintiff, 17 PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE,
19 v.

20 JEAN S. WOODFORD, Acting Warden,
Secretar ofthe Californa Departent of
21 Corrections; STEVEN W. ORNOSKI, Acting
Warden for the California State Prison at San
22 Quentin,

23

Defendants.

Case No.
MEMORADUM OF POINTS AND AUTHORITIES IN SUPPORT OF PLAINTIFF PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE'S MOTION TO CONSOLIDATE PURSUANT TO Fed.R.Civ.P. 42(a)
Date: Time: Dept: Judge:

24

25

26

27

28

MEMORANDUM OF POINTS AND AUTHORITIES IN SUPPORT OF MOTION TO CONSOLIDATE CASE NO.

Case 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 4 Filed 03/08/2006 Page 2 of 5

1

I. INTRODUCTION

2 Pursuant to Federal Rule of

Civil Procedure 42(a), Plaintiff

Pacific News Service

3 ("PNS") hereby moves to consolidate the present action with an earlier filed action now pending

4 before Judge Fogel, Morales v. Woodford, Case Nos. C 06219 JF and C 06 926 IF RS, for

5 puroses of discovery and an evidentiar hearng. Plaintiff

Michael Angelo Morales does not

6 oppose this motion. See Decl. of

Wendy Thur in Supp. ofPl. PNS's Motions to Relate Cases,

7 Consolidate, and Shorten Time,ir 10.

8 Granting this motion would be consistent with the interests of efficiency and judicial
9 economy because both actions involve common factual issues. Additionally, the tWo cases wil 10 involve similar, although not identical discovery.
1 1 PNS is aware that a discovery schedule and evidentiary hearng date have been
12 established in the Morales case and is wiling to conform to this expedited schedule. PNS 13 therefore does not anticipate that consolidation will delay the Morales litigation.

14

II. BACKGROUND

15

On January 18, 2006, Michael Angelo Morales, a death row inmate at San Quentin State

16 Prison set to be executed on February 21,2006, filed a42 D.S.C. § 1983 lawsuit challenging

17 Californa's lethal injection protocol, San Quentin Operational Procedure 770 ("Procedure 770").

18 Morales raised an Eighth Amendment challenge to Procedure 770, alleging that the protocol

19 would subj ect him to an undue risk of suffering excruciating pain while being put to death.

20

Morales offered evidence and raised arguents critical of

Procedure 770's ability to ensure that

21 he would receive sufficient amounts of sodium pentothal, the drg responsible for rendering him

22 unconscious, and therefore unable to feel the otherwise excruciating levels of pain the other two

23

drgs in the lethal

injection protocol would cause him.

24

Among other things, Morales alleged that the prison personnel entrusted with

25 administering the lethal injection lacked the necessary training and experience to ensure that the

26 sodium pentothal would be properly administered. Additionally, Morales attacked Procedure

27

770's use of

pan cur onium bromide, the second drg administered to the inmate, which paralyzes

28 the inmate's voluntar muscle movement. Morales claimed that pancuronium bromide would

367928.01

1
MEMORANDUM OF POINTS AND AUTHORITIES IN SUPPORT OF MOTION TO CONSOLIDATE
CASE NO.

Case 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 4 Filed 03/08/2006 Page 3 of 5

1 prevent him from effectively communicating. with prison personnel if the sodium pentothal was

2 riot properly administered and he remained conscious for all or part ofthe execution process,
3 until death.

4 Like Morales' case, PNS's action also raises a federal constitutional challenge to
5 Procedure 770, and to pancuronium bromide's masking effects in particular.l Specifically,

6 plaintiffPNS alleges that pancuronium bromide, which fuctions neither to cause the inmate's

7 death nor to reduce the amount of pain he experiences, is nothing more than a "chemical curain"

8 that conceals important information about the execution process (such as evidence that the

9 inmate is conscious and experiencing pain) from members ofthe press and the public viewing

10 the execution. PNS therefore contends that Procedure 770's inclusion of

pan cur onium bromide

11 violates the First Amendment right of the press and the public to attend, meanngfully witness,

12 gather information at, and report on executions.

13

III. ARGUMENT

14 Rule 42(a) ofthe Federal Rules of

Civil Procedure provides in pertinent par:

15 When actions involving a common question of law or fact are pending before the cour, it may order a joint hearng or tral of any or all the matters in issue in the
16 actions; it may order all the actions consolidated; and it may make such orders
concernng proceeåings therein as may tend to avoid unecessary costs or delay.
17

18 "The distrct cour has broad discretion under this rule to consolidate cases pending in the

19 same distrct." Investors Research Co. v. United States Dist. Court

for Cent. Dist., 877 F.2d 777,

20 777 (9th Cir. 1989). In determinng whether to consolidate, the cour must weigh the savings of

21 time and effort that consolidation would produce against any inconvenience, delay, or expense

22 that it would cause. Arnold v. Eastern Air Lines, Inc., 681 F.2d 186, 193, cert. denied, 460 U.S.

23 1102 (1983).
24 "(T)ypically, consolidation is favored." Perez-Funez v. District Directors, Immigration

25 and Naturalization Service, 611 F. Supp. 990, 994 (C.D. CaL. 1984) (citations omitted); see also

26 Weitort v. A. H. Bull & Co., 192 F. Supp. 165, 166-167 (B.D. Pa. 1961) (consolidation of actions

27 1 Morales, however, challenges aspects of Procedure 770 other than the use of pancuronium
28 bromide.

367928.01

2 MEMORANDUM OF POINS AND AUTHORITIES IN SUPPORT OF MOTION TO CONSOLIDATE
CASE NO.

Case 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 4 Filed 03/08/2006 Page 4 of 5 1 should be encouraged). Consolidation is especially favored where the actions involve common

4 common questions of fact and law are involved in two actions, they should be consolidated). In

5 the present case, all the factors weigh in favor of consolidation.

6 A.
7

Consolidation Wil Result in Substantial Savings in Time and Resources for the

Parties and the Court

Because the Cases Share Common Factual Questions

Wil Entail Substantial Overlap in Discovery

and

8 Morales and PNS raise several common factual questions: (1) whether and in what ways
9 pancuronium bromide suppresses indicia of pain or consciousness manifested by an inmate
10 subjected to Procedure 770; (2) what indicia of pain or consciousness an inmate would manfest
11 ifpancuronium bromide were not administered; and (3) defendants' reasons for including

12 pancuronium bromide in Procedure 770. Because the indicia of

pain or consciousness that an

13 inmate might

manfest are relevant to PNS's claim, the PNS lawsuit wil necessarly address the

14 mechansms by which Procedure 770 might result in pain, a factual issue central to Morales'

15 Eighth Amendment claim.
16 That corrunon factual issues exist is bolstered by the Ninth Circuit's evaluation of a 17 similar First Amendment claim in Beardslee v. Woodford, 395 F.3d 1064 (9th Cir. 2005). 18 Beardslee v. Woodford, No. C 04 5381 IF, was a case to which Morales was related. In

19 Beardslee, another case involving an inmate's Eighth Amendment challenge to Procedure 770,

20 the Ninth Circuit focused on the state's lack of

justification for using pancuronium bromide - an

21 issue that is central to PNS's claim. 395 F.3d at 1075-76. Additionally, although that cour did

22 not decide the First Amendment claim because it was only raised in an amicus brief for the first

23 time on appeal, the court nonetheless noted that the claim "may have merit." Id. at 1076 n.14.

24 Common factual issues wil also lead to a substantial overlap in discovery. Both PNS

25 and Mr. Morales are likely to seek discovery regarding the nature and administration of

26 Procedure 770, depositions of prison officials who conceived of and administered Procedure 770,

27 and information regarding whether past lethal injection executions pursuant to Procedure 770

28

367928.01

3 MEMORANDUM OF POINTS AND AUTHORITIES IN SUPPORT OF MOTION TO CONSOLIDATE
. CASE NO.

Case 5:06-cv-01793-JF Document 4 Filed 03/08/2006 Page 5 of 5

1 subjected executed inmates to painful deaths. Duplication of discovery wil therefore be

2 avoided.

3 B. 4

Consolidation Wil Not Cause Unnecessary Delay of the Morales Action Because Pacifc News Service Is Willing to. Conform to this Court's Expedited Schedule

Rule 42( a) specifically provides that when consolidating actions, the Cour "may make

5

such orders concernng proceedings therein as may tend to avoid unecessar costs or delay."

6

Fed. R. Civ. P. 42(a). Based on conversations with counsel for Mr. Morales, PNS is aware of
7

the

discovery schedule and May 2, 2006 hearing date established by this Court for the Morales case.

8

See Declaration
9

of Wendy J. Thurm, ir 5~ PNSis wiling to conform to this case

schedule.

Consolidation would therefore not require the Cour to alter the pace oflitigation in the Morales

10
case, and PNS does not
11

move the Cour to do so.

iv. CONCLUSION
12
Because the varous claims in both actions involve common questions of fact and

13

substantial overlap in discovery, consolidation

of the two actions is appropriate. Accordingly,

14

Pacific News Service respectfully requests the Cour to grant their motion to consolidate for

15

purposes of discovery and an evidentiar hearng, pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure
16
i 4'"/a~
¿~ ). 17

18
Dated: March 8, 2006
19
20
21

ACLU FOUNATION OF NORTHERN CALIFORNIA
KEKER & V AN NEST, LLP

22

By:

23

WENDY J. T

24

Attorneys for Plain iff PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE

25

26

27

28

367928.01

4 MEMORANDUM OF POINTS AND AUTHORITIES IN SUPPORT OF MOTION TO CONSOLIDATE
CASE NO.

