Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document66 Filed07/17/07 Page1 of 10

1 EDMUND G. BROWN JR. Attorney General of the State of California
2 DAVID S. CHANEY Chief Assistant Attorney General
3 FRANCEST.GRUNDER Senior Assistant Attorney General
4 THOMAS S. PATTERSON Supervising Deputy Attorney General
5 MICHAEL J. QUINN, State Bar No. 209542 Deputy Attorney General
6 455 Golden Gate Avenue, Suite 11000 San Francisco, CA 94102-7004
7 Telephone: (415) 703-5726 Fax: (415) 703-5843
8 Email: Michae1.Quinn@doj.ca.gov

9 Attorneys for Defendants Tilton, Ayers, and Schwarzenegger
10

11 IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
12 FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA
13 SAN JOSE DIVISION
14

15 PACIFIC NEWS SERVICE,

C 06-1793 JF

16

Plaintiff,

17

v.

18 JAMES E. TILTON, Secretary of the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation;
19 ROBERT L. AYERS, JR., Warden, California State Prison at San Quentin, San Quentin, CA; ARNOLD
20 SCHWARZENEGGER, Governor, State of California; and Does 1-50,
21 Defendants.
22

23

24

25

26

27

DEFENDANTS' MEMORANDUM OF POINTS AND AUTHORITIES IN SUPPORT OF THEIR MOTION TO DISMISS THE FIRST AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF UNDER FRCP 12(b)(6) FOR FAILURE TO STATE A CLAIM OR, IN THE ALTERNATIVE, UNDER FRCP 12(b)(I) FOR LACK OF SUBJECT-MATTER JURISDICTION

Hearing: September 21, 2007

Time: 9:00 a.m.

Courtroom: 3

Judge:

The Honorable

Jeremy Fogel

28 / / /

Defs.' Memo. P&A. Supp. Mot. Dismiss
1

Pacific News Service v. Tilton, et al. C 06-1793 JF

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document66 Filed07/17/07 Page2 of 10

1

Defendants Tilton, Ayers, and Schwarzenegger (Defendants) submit their Memorandum of

2 Points and Authorities in Support of their Motion to Dismiss the first amended complaint under

3 FRCP 12(b)(6) for failure to state a claim or, in the alternative, under FRCP 12(b)(1) for lack of

4 subject matter jurisdiction.

5

I.

6

INTRODUCTION

7

In California First Amendment Coalition v. Woodford, 299 F.3d 868 (9th Cir. 2002)

8 (CFAC), the Ninth Circuit defined the press and the public's right to view executions under the

9 First Amendment. There, the court concluded that the press and the public have the right to view

10 executions from the moment the condemned is escorted into the execution chamber, including

11 those initial procedures that are inextricably intertwined with the process ofputting the

12 condemned inmate to death. CFAC, 299 F.3d at 877.

13

Plaintiffs first amended complaint, which alleges that pancuronium bromide functions as a

14 "chemical curtain" that conceals information from the press and the public, does not state a claim

15 upon which relief can be granted. The use of pancuronium bromide during a lethal injection

16 execution does not impede the right that was defined in CFA C, because that drug does not affect

17 Plaintiffs ability to watch the condemned inmate enter the execution chamber, be attached to the

18 execution device, and then die. CFAC, 299 F.3d at 876. Nothing in CFAC gives Plaintiff the

19 right to dictate the method that the State uses in order to perform a lethal-injection execution.

20 Accordingly, because the first amended complaint fails to set forth a legally cognizable claim

21 under the First Amendment, it should be dismissed.

22

In the alternative, even if this Court finds that the first amended complaint sets forth a

23 legally sufficient claim, it should still be dismissed on ripeness grounds. The ripeness doctrine

24 seeks to avoid the premature adjudication of cases when the issues posed are not fully formed.

25 Here, Plaintiffs complaint assumes that both the revised lethal injection protocol and the use of

26 pancuronium bromide are constitutional. However, because both the revised protocol and the

27 utilization ofpancuronium bromide have been challenged in the Morales action, it is unclear

28 whether Defendants will be able to use pancuronium bromide when it next performs a lethal-

Defs.' Memo. P&A. Supp. Mot. Dismiss
2

Pacific News Service v. Tilton, et al. C 06-1793 JF

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document66 Filed07/17/07 Page3 of 10

1 injection execution. Accordingly, because the claims set forth in Plaintiffs first amended

2 complaint are not sufficiently focused to permit judicial resolution, they are not ripe, and should

3 be dismissed without prejudice.

4

li

5

STATEMENT OF ISSUES

6 1. Whether Plaintiffs first amended complaint states a claim upon which relief can be granted.

7 2. Whether Plaintiffs first amended complaint is ripe for judicial resolution.

8

III.

9

STATEMENT OF FACTS

10

In its amended complaint for declaratory and injunctive relief, Plaintiff, a media

11 organization that reports on California executions, seeks temporary, preliminary, and permanent

12 injunctive relief to prevent Defendants from executing any death row inmates in a manner that

13 conceals important information to which the public is constitutionally entitled. (Amended

14 Complaint [Am. Compl.] at 1:10-13.)

15

Plaintiff contends that Defendants' use of pancuronium bromide, a paralytic agent that

16 allegedly acts as a "chemical curtain" over the lethal-injection process, makes it impossible for

17 witnesses to "view adequately" the dying process. (Am. CompI. at 1:16-18.) PNS alleges that

18 pancuronium bromide (1) prevents society from watching, in a meaningful way, executed

19 inmates die (Am. CompI. at 5:14-16); (2) suppresses information about whether the inmate

20 experiences pain, and if so, how much (Am. CompI. at 5:17-19); (3) conceals information from

21 members of the press and the public about whether pain is present or absent (Am. CompI. at 6:4-

22 5); and (4) masks both disputed and undisputed indicia of pain or consciousness (Am. CompI. at

23 6:11-12). PNS also alleges that the use of pancuronium bromide prevents the public and the

24 press from obtaining other "socially relevant information," including an inmate's attempt to

25 express "repentance, confession, anger or defiance" while fighting off the effects of the sodium

26 pentothal. (Am. CompI. at 7:1-6.)

27 / / /

28 / / /

Defs.' Memo. P&A. Supp. Mot. Dismiss
3

Pacific News Service v. Tilton, et al. C 06-1793 JF

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document66 Filed07/17/07 Page4 of 10

1

IV.

2

STANDARD OF REVIEW

3 A. The Standards for Rule 12(b)(6) and 12(b)(1) motions

4

A Rule 12(b)(6) motion tests the "legal sufficiency of the claim or claims stated in the

5 complaint." Beliveau v. Caras, 873 F. Supp. 1393, 1395 (C.D. Cal. 1995) (quoting Schwarzer,

6 Tashima and Wagstaffe, California Practice Guide: Federal Civil Procedure Before Trial,

7 §9:187 (1994». Although Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8(a)(2) does not require a complaint

8 to contain specific facts, it does require the complaint to plead "enough facts to state a claim to

9 reliefthat is plausible on its face." Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, _ U.S. _, 127 S. Ct. 1955,

10 1974 (2007) (abrogating the "no set of facts" language of Conley v. Gibson, 355 U.S. 41, 45-46

11 (1957». In other words, Plaintiffis obligated to provide "more than labels and conclusions, and a

12 formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of action." Id. at 1964-65. The complaint has to

13 have enough factual allegations "to raise a right to relief above the speculative level." Id. at 1965.

14

Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) allows a defendant to seek dismissal of an action

15 for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. The plaintiff has the burden to allege in his complaint

16 "whatever is essential to federal jurisdiction." Smith v. McCullough, 270 U.S. 456, 459 (1926).

17 Ifthe plaintiff fails to do so and the defendant brings the deficiency to the court's attention, the

18 court "must dismiss the case, unless the defect be corrected by amendment." Id

19

V.

20

ARGUMENT

21 A. 22 23 24

THE FIRST AMENDED COMPLAINT SHOULD BE DISMISSED, BECAUSE IT FAILS TO STATE A CLAIM UPON WHICH RELIEF CAN BE GRANTED.

1.

v. The Decision in California First Amendment Coalition Woodford

Establishes the First Amendment Right of the Press and the Public to View

an Execution.

25 In California First Amendment Coalition v. Woodford, 299 F.3d 868 (9th Cir. 2002)
26 (CFAC), the Ninth Circuit examined the extent to which the public and the press are entitled to
27 view an execution. There, the press plaintiffs challenged a procedure that prohibited witnesses
28

Defs.' Memo. P&A. Supp. Mot. Dismiss
4

Pacific News Service v. Tilton, et al. C 06-1793 JF

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document66 Filed07/17/07 Page5 of 10

1 from observing an execution until after the execution team had brought the condemned into the

2 chamber, inserted the intravenous lines, and left him alone to await the order to dispense the

3 chemicals. Id. at 870. The court found that the "public and press historically have been allowed

4 to watch the condemned inmate enter the execution place, be attached to the execution device,

5 and then die." Id. at 876. The court found that historical tradition strongly supported the

6 public's First Amendment right to view the condemned as the guards escorted him into the

7 chamber, strapped him to the gurney, and inserted the intravenous lines. fd. The court, therefore,

8 held that the public enjoyed a First Amendment right to view executions from the moment the

9 condemned is escorted into the execution chamber, including those "initial procedures" that are

10 inextricably intertwined with the process of putting the condemned inmate to death. Id. at 877.

11

Plaintiffs first amended complaint fails to set forth any violation ofthe First Amendment

12 or any other claim upon which relief can be granted, since the state's use of pancuronium does

13 not restrict Plaintiffs access to or ability to view an execution. Moreover, nothing in the CFAC

14 decision gives Plaintiff the power to dictate the particular drugs that the State can use in order to

15 perform an execution by lethal injection.

16

a. The Use of Pancuronium Bromide does not Violate Plaintiff's First

Amendment Right to Observe an Execution.

17

As mentioned, under CFAC, Plaintiff has the right to view executions "from the moment

18

the condemned enters the execution chamber through, to and including, the time the condemned

19

is declared dead." CFAC, 299 F.3d at 885-86. In its amended complaint, Plaintiff asserts that

20

"pancuronium bromide acts as a chemical curtain that conceals indicia of pain from the members

21

of the press and the public that are observing the executions." (Am. CompI. at 6:1-3.) Plaintiff

22

also contends that pancuronium bromide is administered with the intention of concealing

23

information from the press and the public. (Am. CompI. at 8:9-12.)

24

Even ifthis Court accepts as true all of Plaintiffs allegations regarding the use of

25

pancuronium bromide (which it must when analyzing a Rule 12(b)(6) motion), the amended

26

complaint fails to set forth a claim upon which relief can be granted. Defendants' use of

27

pancuronium bromide during a lethal injection execution does not impede Plaintiffs ability to

28

Defs.' Memo. P&A. Supp. Mot. Dismiss
5

Pacific News Service v. Tilton, et al. C 06-1793 JF

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document66 Filed07/17/07 Page6 of 10

1 exercise the First Amendment right to view executions that was delineated in CFAC. To the

2 contrary, Plaintiff, under the revised version ofO.P. 770, has the right to examine the execution

3 process from the moment the condemned is escorted into the lethal injection chamber, and has no

4 restrictions on what it may observe, publish, or choose to withhold. Nothing in Plaintiffs

5 amended complaint suggests that Plaintiff will be denied the opportunity to view every aspect of

6 the execution procedure authorized by the courts. Because the administration of pancuronium

7 bromide does not hinder Plaintiffs right of access to view a lethal injection execution, the

8 amended complaint does not state a claim that merits relief.

9

b. Nothing in the CFACDecision Permits the Press or the Public to

Define How an Execution Should be Conducted.

10

Although Plaintiff has the right to observe an execution from the moment the condemned

11

is led into the execution chamber, the CFAC decision does not provide the press or the public

12

with the right to dictate how the state performs an execution or manipulate what is being

13

observed. lfthe State were planning to execute a condemned inmate by electric chair, hanging or

14

firing squad, Plaintiff would have a right to attend and view the proceedings under CFAC.

15

However, in those situations, Plaintiff would not have a First Amendment right to challenge the

16

amount of electricity used to execute the condemned inmate, the number of bullets used by a

17

firing squad, or the type of rope employed in a hanging on the grounds that a different method

18

would enable Plaintiff to better view the "dying process" or to observe the physical impact of the

19

procedures on the inmate. (Am. CompI. at 1:14-18.) Plaintiff similarly lacks a First Amendment

20

right to object to the use of pancuronium bromide in the course of a lethal injection execution on

21

those grounds.

22

The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized that the Constitution does not accord the press

23

special access to information not shared by members of the public generally. Pell v. Procunier,

24

417 U.S. 817, 834 (1974). In objecting to the use of pancuronium bromide, Plaintiff demands

25

more than special access-it seeks the unprecedented right to alter the method used by the State in

26

order to perform a lethal injection execution. However, because Plaintiffs only interest under

27

the First Amendment is viewing the execution that is actually provided by the State, rather than

28

Defs.' Memo. P&A. Supp. Mot. Dismiss
6

Pacific News Service v. Tilton, et al. C 06-1793 JF

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document66 Filed07/17/07 Page7 of 10

1 viewing some other execution comporting more closely to its preferences, the first amended

2 complaint does not state a claim for relief. If CFA C were read as Plaintiff urges, every execution

3 would be subject to challenges on the theory that it "masks" or places a "curtain" over what

4 would occur if the execution were only conducted differently. Furthermore, every change in the

5 execution process would provide a basis for challenging the next execution. Accordingly,

6 because the First Amendment does not provide Plaintiff with the sweeping power to change the

7 State's execution methods, the first amended complaint should be dismissed.

8
B. IN THE ALTERNATIVE, THIS SUIT SHOULD STILL BE DISMISSED FOR

9

LACK OF SUBJECT MATTER JURISDICTION BECAUSE PLAINTIFF'S

CLAIM IS NOT RIPE.

10

1. Plaintiff has the Burden of Establishing that its Claim is Ripe.

11

Even if federal-question jurisdiction may be established by pleading a substantial

12

constitutional claim, the claim must still be ripe for review before a court will exercise

13

jurisdiction. Association ofAmerican Med. Colleges v. United States, 217 F.3d 770, 784, n.9

14

(9th Cir. 2000). Whether statutory or constitutional in origin, an unripe claim is not justiciable.

15

Id. A cause of action presumptively lies outside of a federal court's limited jurisdiction, and the

16

"burden of establishing the contrary rests upon the party asserting jurisdiction." Kokkonen v.

17

Guardian Life Ins. Co. ofAmerica, 511 U.S. 375, 377 (1994) (quoting McNutt v. General Motors

18

Acceptance Corp., 298 U.S. 178, 182-83 (1936)). Accordingly, in the instant action, Plaintiff has

19

the burden of establishing that its claim is ripe.

20

2. Because Plaintiff's Claim Is Not Ripe, It Must Be Dismissed Without Prejudice.

21

The ripeness doctrine determines the time, if any, at which a party may seek pre-

22

enforcement review of a statute or regulation. Triple G Landfills, Inc. v. Board ofCommrs., 977

23

F.2d 287,289 (7th Cir. 1992). It seeks to avoid the premature adjudication of cases when the

24

issues posed are not fully formed, or when the nature and extent of the statute's application are

25

uncertain. Abbott Laboratories v. Gardner, 387 U.S. 136, 148 (1967). Inquiries into ripeness

26

generally address two factors: first, whether the relevant issues are sufficiently focused to permit

27

judicial resolution without further factual development; and, second, whether the parties would

28

Defs.' Memo. P&A. Supp. Mot. Dismiss
7

Pacific News Service v. Tilton, et al. C 06-1793 JF

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document66 Filed07/17/07 Page8 of 10

1 suffer any hardship by the postponement ofjudicial action. Id. at 149.

2

An analysis of the two ripeness "factors" in the instant action establishes that Plaintiffs

3 claim is not ripe for review, and should be dismissed without prejudice.

4

a. Plaintiff's Claims Are Not Fit For Judicial Decision, Since It Is

Unclear Whether the Revised Version of o.r, 770 Will Be

5

Implemented.

6

A federal court should normally refrain from resolving issues involving "contingent

7 future events that may not occur as anticipated, or indeed may not occur at all." Clinton v.

8 Acequia, Inc., 94 F.3d 568, 572 (9th Cir. 1996). The ripeness doctrine requires a live, focused

9 case ofreal consequence to the parties. Triple G Landfills, Inc., 977 F.2d at 291.

10

Plaintiffs claim is dependent on a "contingent future event that may not occur as

11 anticipated, or ... at all," namely, a conclusion by this Court that the revised version of O'P. 770

12 and Defendants' use ofpancuronium bromide as part ofthe lethal injection protocol may be

13 implemented because it is valid under the Eighth Amendment. In Morales v. Tilton, condemned

14 inmate Morales claims that the "protocol and actual practice by which lethal injection executions

15 are performed under Procedure No. 770 violates constitutional and statutory provisions enacted

16 to prevent cruelty, pain and torture." Morales v. Tilton, 06-219 JF (N.D. Ca1.), Third Am.

17 Comp1. at 3:27-4:2. Moreover, Morales claims that the use of pancuronium bromide to paralyze

18 condemned inmates greatly increases the risk that an inadequately sedated prisoner will be

19 subjected to a painful and protracted death, and will cause an unnecessarily painful death. Id. at

20 18:19-22.

21

Because virtually every portion of the revised version of a.p. 770, including the use of

22 pancuronium bromide, has been challenged in the Morales case, the issues raised by Plaintiff in

23 this case are not sufficiently focused to permit judicial resolution. Although Defendants believe

24 the revised version of O'P, 770 is constitutional, it has not yet been approved by this Court.
25 Indeed, there is a possibility that this Court could rule in Morales that the revised version of a.p.

26 770 or the protocol's inclusion of pancuronium bromide as one of the three drugs used to execute

27 an inmate violates the Eighth Amendment. Accordingly, because Plaintiffs case hangs on

28 "future contingencies that mayor may not occur," the case is not yet ripe for judicial revievv.

Defs.' Memo. P&A. Supp. Mot. Dismiss
8

Pacific News Service v. Tilton, et al. C 06-1793 JF

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document66 Filed07/17/07 Page9 of 10

1 Clinton, 94 F.3d at 572.

2

b. Plaintiff will not Suffer any Hardship if Judicial Action is Postponed

in this Case.

3 Plaintiff will not experience hardship if this Court withholds consideration of the claims

4 raised in the amended complaint. To the contrary, postponing action would actually be

5 advantageous to both the parties and the court. The parties would benefit because they would not

6

have to spend time and money propounding written discovery upon each other, taking

7 depositions, and filing motions until this Court has determined that the use of pancuronium

8 bromide in the lethal injection protocol is permitted under the Eighth Amendment. Moreover,

9

the Court would be able to avoid ruling on motions and other filings until it has found that the

10

Eighth Amendment does not bar the State from using pancuronium bromide in the lethal

11

injection process.

12

Plaintiff will not suffer financial, legal, or any other hardship if the adjudication of their

13

claim is postponed until after a decision has been issued in Morales. Moreover, adjudicating

14
Plaintiffs claim while a.p. 770 and the use of pancuronium bromide is being litigated in the

15 Morales action would be a poor use of both the parties' and this Court's resources. Accordingly,

16 Plaintiff should not be allowed to pursue its claims until after a decision in Morales has been

17

issued by this Court.

18
VI.

19

CONCLUSION

20

The press and the public have the right to view executions from the moment the

21

condemned enters the chamber until he is declared dead. Because the use of pancuronium

22

bromide does not impede Plaintiff's ability to view a lethal injection execution, Plaintiff's first

23

amended complaint does not state a claim upon which relief can be granted. Accordingly, the

24

first amended complaint should be dismissed.

25

/II

26

/II

27

/II

28

Defs.' Memo. P&A. Supp. Mot. Dismiss
9

Pacific News Service v. Tilton, et al. C 06-1793 JF

Case3:06-cv-01793-RS Document66 Filed07/17/07 Page10 of 10

1

In the alternative, the Court should dismiss this case for lack of subject matter jurisdiction

2 because the complaint will not be ripe for judicial resolution until a ruling has been issued in the'

3 Morales case.

4

5

Dated: July 17, 2007

6

Respectfully submitted,

7

EDMUND G. BROWN JR.

Attorney General of the State of California

8

DAVID S. CHANEY

Chief Assistant Attorney General 9
FRANCEST.GRUNDER

10

Senior Assistant Attorney General

THOMAS S. PATTERSON

11

Supervising Deputy Attorney General

12

13

14

15

Deputy Attorney General

Attorneys for Defendants

16

Tilton, Ayers, and Schwarzenegger

17

18 20092892.wpd
SF2006402675
19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

Defs.' Memo. P&A. Supp. Mot. Dismiss

. 10

Pacific News Service v. Tilton, et al. C 06-1793 JF

