Abstract The refining sector comprises a lot of different processes, since a wide range of final products are obtained in refineries. In any case, CO 2 emissions levels are high and three units can be considered as the main sources accounting the majority of carbon dioxide emissions to the atmosphere: the utility boilers system, the process heaters and the fluid catalytic cracking unit (FCC). In this study, the substitution of the utility boilers system for an oxy-combustion power plant is presented. The power plant is designed to cover the steam thermal and electricity demands of oil refinery. In addition, a heat integration methodology based on pinch analysis is applied to the whole concept for increasing efficiency. Final results show that more than 380,000 tonnes of CO 2 could be avoided. Afterwards, a complete economic approach is carried out. Although profitability is still low with current economic costs, it is expected that in the medium term, oxy-combustion could be economically feasible in refining sector. To this extent, sensitivity analysis shows affordable values for main economic parameters that can be reached in the next years. A 24 €/MWh natural gas price reduces operational cost for oxy-combustion power plant below the conventional refinery value. An electricity price higher than 67 €/MWh and a CO 2 cost around 20 €/tCO 2 also seem to reduce operational cost below reference case ones. The study concludes with the analysis of some realistic future scenarios that prove the oxy-combustion technology both technically and economically feasible and payback periods between 9 and 11 years with IRR values around 7% can be affordable within the following years.