Abstract This paper suggests a new approach to design of heat storage units. The designed Heat Storage Units (HSU) should be used in repeatable processes for different Time Slices (TS) with the same pair of previously heat integrated process streams. The design of Heat Storage Units (HSU) is based on analysis of heat cascades calculated for heat process integration of selected streams with Pinch Table Algorithm (PTA). Determined surplus heat loads, the temperature difference of storage material and the physical characteristics of heat storage material were used for computation of construction characteristics and estimated cost for Heat Storage Units (HSU). Two different approaches were used, heat storage process depends on industrial process parameters related to Pinch technology as well as determination of optimal volume for heat storage design on total cost for investing in such units. The designed Heat Storage system related to Pinch technology gave different compared to the approach with minimization of total estimated costs. The final selections of Heat Storage Unit design was determined with satisfying of Pinch Technology rules. The previously analyzed case study for heat process integration of Baker‘s yeast and ethyl alcohol production plant were referent system for upgrading for Heat Storage system. The cost estimation of designed Heat Storage Units (on both proposed ways) was made, and it was compared with estimated prices for hot and cold utility that would be replaced with Heat Storage for the whole annual cycle. In this case study low profitability was found because of small heat load within Heat Storage accumulation. Systems that would accumulate much more heat energy would give profitable investment.