Abstract The paper deals with the synthesis problem of mass exchange networks (MEN's) for waste minimization by adopting a mathematical programming approach based on the stage-wise superstructure representation of the MEN's, analogous to the one introduced by [Yee, T. F., & Grossmann, I. E. (1990a). Simultaneous optimization models for heat integration. I. Area and energy targeting and modeling of multi-stream exchangers. Computers and Chemical Engineering 14, 1151; Yee, T. F., & Grossmann, I. E. (1990b). Simultaneous optimization models for heat integration. II. Heat exchanger network synthesis. Computers and Chemical Engineering 14, 1165] for synthesis of heat exchange networks (HEN's). This stage-wise superstructure-based representation cannot only handle multiple transferable components and reactive separating agents directly, but also be extended to include regeneration networks straightforwardly. Not using any heuristics that are based on the concept of pinch points, the proposed superstructure-based representation for MEN's is formulated as a mixed-integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) optimization model, and therefore the operating cost for the external lean mass separating agents as well as the regenerating agents and the annualized equipment cost for exchange units can be minimized simultaneously. Four benchmark examples from literatures—including those with single recovery component, multiple waste components, reactive mass separating agent, and regenerating streams—are examined to illustrate the applicability of proposed approach for synthesis of various MEN's.