The rapid growth of online information services, social media and other digital format documents means that huge amounts of information are becoming immediately available and readily accessible to a large number of end-users. However, human ability to organize and understand a large number of documents is limited. This well-known information overload problem is most acute when we need to make a decision or understand something deeply, which typically involves reviewing several documents, but have limited time. Reading through long documents consumes precious time in understanding the gist of the document. Web search engines look for documents from the Internet based upon user supplied queries. They not only overwhelm users with too many results, they also provide documents that may not be very relevant to the topic being studied by the user. For example, if the user is searching using some keyword and the search engine finds it somewhere inside a document, that document will be a "search hit" even if the document is not really relevant to the keyword. The most common search method is based on maintaining an inverted list (text index) of documents' text. Not only precision is hurt by indexing every word in the document, excluding stop words, but also efficiency is adversely impacted. If summaries are indexed and searched instead, index size will be considerably smaller and search hits will be of better quality (fewer false positives) BIB61934860 . This can be explained using the definition of Precision and Recall measures used in information retrieval. Precision is defined as the percentage of the relevant items in the returned set and Recall is the percentage of the relevant items in the returned set compared to those in the collection. If the whole collection is retrieved, then the Recall is 100%, but Precision is low. Most search engines suffer from this problem (high Recall and low Precision). If search engines search only a document's primary ideas, instead of every word, then Recall will likely not be decreased but Precision will likely improve. Hence, an automated facility for summarizing documents to improve productivity is desirable. A good summarization system should include only sentences that are most important to a document's theme; it must also cover all documents' topics BIB7003631 . Using a summary instead of the whole document as a representative of what the document is about would mean processing a fraction (20% or less) of the document's text, yet yield better Precision and lesser processing time for search queries. In order to determine the requirements of a good summarization system, many text summarization approaches were reviewed. An in-depth review of text summarization literature was conducted and results from this study along with a description of each algorithm, its strengths and weaknesses are presented in this article. Section II presents an overview of the major types of text summarization techniques. Section III provides detailed information on unsupervised text summarization techniques. The evaluation techniques used for assessing the quality of text summarization systems are also discussed in section IV. It was found that due to the shortcomings of the text summarization approaches currently available, there is a lack of a universal approach for document summarization that provides high Precision and Recall with various types of text corpora.