The vector space model using cosine measure is one of the most widely used models for text retrieval, mainly because of its conceptual simplicity. Sentences and queries are represented in a high-dimensional space, in which each dimension of the space corresponds to a word in a sentence collection  . The www.ijacsa.thesai.org most relevant sentences for a query are expected to be those represented by the vectors closest to the query. This method can be slightly modified to calculate a weight for each sentence with respect to its relevance to the entire document. In order to calculate the cosine measure of a sentence, the frequency of each term in the entire document (docfreq) and the frequency of the term in a particular sentence (termfreq) are calculated. Then for each sentence, i.e. query, the cosine angle between the query and the entire document is calculated using the formula below. If the cosine measure is highest, i.e. the cosine angle between query and document is smallest, then that sentence is the most relevant to the document. Thus the sentences are ranked according to their cosine measures and a summary is created using top ranked sentences. The formula for cosine similarity is as follows: where n = number of terms per sentence The Cosine Similarity technique is not well-suited for obtaining diverse topics in a document, although it does an excellent job of selecting the most relevant sentences in the document. In Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR), the Cosine Similarity technique is changed to add diversity to the document summary BIB6334682 .