Despite recent deep-learning-based image captioning methods having achieved promising results, they largely depend on the paired image and sentence caption datasets. These types of methods can only generate a description of the objects within the context. Therefore, the methods require a large set of training image-sentence pairs. Novel-object-based image captioning methods can generate descriptions of novel objects that are not present in paired image-caption datasets. The methods of this category have the following general steps: (1) A separate lexical classifier and a language model are trained on unpaired image data and unpaired text data. A simple block diagram of a novel-object-based image captioning method is given in Figure 9 . Current image captioning methods are trained on image-caption paired datasets. As a result, if there are unseen objects in the test images, they cannot present them in their generated captions. Anne et al. BIB6918332 proposed a deep compositional captioner (DCC) that can represent the unseen objects in generated captions. Yao et al. BIB6153535 proposed a copying mechanism to generate a description for novel objects. This method uses a separate object recognition dataset to develop classifiers for novel objects. It integrates the appropriate words in the output captions by a decoder RNN with a copying mechanism. The architecture of the method adds a new network to recognize the unseen objects from unpaired images and incorporate them with the LSTM to generate captions. Generating captions for the unseen images is a challenging research problem. Venugopalan et al. BIB8457705 introduced a novel object captioner (NOC) for generating captions for unseen objects in the image. They used external sources for recognizing unseen objects and learning semantic knowledge.