4.2.1 BLEU. BLEU (Bilingual evaluation understudy) BIB11080756 is a metric that is used to measure the quality of machine-generated text. Individual text segments are compared with a set of reference texts and scores are computed for each of them. In estimating the overall quality of the generated text, the computed scores are averaged. However, syntactical correctness is not considered here. The performance of the BLEU metric is varied depending on the number of reference translations and the size of the generated text. Subsequently, Papineni et al. introduced a modified precision metric. This metric uses n-grams. BLEU is popular because it is a pioneer in automatic evaluation of machine-translated text and has a reasonable correlation with human judgments of quality BIB7647892 BIB15897060 . However, it has a few limitations, such as that BLEU scores are good only if the generated text is short BIB7647892 . There are some cases where an increase in BLEU score does not mean that the quality of the generated text is good BIB1586456 . BIB964287 is a set of metrics that are used for measuring the quality of text summaries. It compares word sequences, word pairs, and n-grams with a set of reference summaries created by humans. Different types of ROUGE such as ROUGE-1, 2, ROUGE-W, and ROUGE-SU4 are used for different tasks. For example, ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-W are appropriate for single-document evaluation, whereas ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-SU4 have good performance in short summaries. However, ROUGE has problems in evaluating multidocument text summaries. BIB7164502 is another metric used to evaluate the machine-translated language. Standard word segments are compared with the reference texts. In addition to this, stems of a sentence and synonyms of words are also considered for matching. METEOR can make a better correlation at the sentence or the segment level. BIB9026666 is an automatic consensus metric for evaluating image descriptions. Most existing datasets have only five captions per image. Previous evaluation metrics work with this small number of sentences and are not enough to measure the consensus between generated captions and human judgment. However, CIDEr achieves human consensus using term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) BIB8864928 . BIB11933981 is a new caption evaluation metric based on semantic concepts. It is based on a graph-based semantic representation called a scene graph BIB16414666 BIB13937253 . This graph can extract the information of different objects and attributes and their relationships from the image descriptions.