Many deep-learning-based methods have been proposed for generating automatic image captions in recent years. Supervised learning, reinforcement learning, and GAN-based methods are commonly used in generating image captions. Both visual space and multimodal space can be used in supervised-learning-based methods. The main difference between visual space and multimodal space occurs in mapping. Visual-space-based methods perform explicit mapping from images to descriptions. In contrast, multimodal-space-based methods incorporate implicit vision and language models. Supervised-learning-based methods are further categorized into encoder-decoder architecture based, compositional architecture based, attention based, semantic concept based, stylized captions, dense image captioning, and novel-object-based image captioning. Encoder-decoder architecture-based methods use a simple CNN and a text generator for generating image captions. Attention-based image captioning methods focus on different salient parts of the image and achieve better performance than encoder-decoder architecture-based methods. Semantic-concept-based image captioning methods selectively focus on different parts of the image and can generate semantically rich captions. Dense image captioning methods can generate region-based image captions. Stylized image captions express various emotions such as romance, pride, and shame. GAN-and RL-based image captioning methods can generate diverse and multiple captions. MS COCO, Flickr30K, and Flickr8K datasets are common and popular datasets used for image captioning. The MS COCO dataset is a very large dataset and all the images in these datasets have multiple captions. The Visual Genome dataset is mainly used for region-based image captioning. Different evaluation metrics are used for measuring the performances of image captions. The BLEU metric is good for small-sentence evaluation. ROUGE has different types and they can be used for evaluating different types of texts. METEOR can perform an evaluation on various segments of a caption. SPICE is better in understanding the semantic details of captions compared to other evaluation metrics. Although success has been achieved in recent years, there is still room for improvement. Generation-based methods can generate novel captions for every image. However, these methods fail to detect prominent objects and attributes and their relationships to some extent in generating accurate and multiple captions. In addition to this, the accuracy of the generated captions largely depends on syntactically correct and diverse captions, which in turn rely on powerful and sophisticated language generation models. Existing methods show their performances on the datasets where images are collected from the same domain. Therefore, working on an open-domain dataset will be an interesting avenue for research in this area. Image-based factual descriptions are not enough to generate high-quality captions. External knowledge can be added in order to generate attractive image captions. Supervised learning needs a large amount of labeled data for training. Therefore, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning will be more popular in the future in image captioning.