Captioning. Semantic-concept-based methods selectively attend to a set of semantic concept proposals extracted from the image. These concepts are then combined into hidden states and the outputs of recurrent neural networks. The methods in this category follow the following steps: (1) The CNN-based encoder is used to encode the image features and semantic concepts. A typical block diagram of this category is shown in Figure 8 . Karpathy et al. extended their method BIB2315434 in BIB59606130 . The later method can generate natural language descriptions for both images and their regions. This method employs a novel combination of CNN over the image regions, bidirectional recurrent neural networks over sentences, and a common multimodal embedding that associates the two modalities. It also demonstrates a multimodal recurrent neural network architecture that utilizes the resultant alignments to train the model for generating novel descriptions of image regions. In this method, dependency tree relations (DTRs) are used to train to map the sentence segments with the image regions that have a fixed window context. In contrast to their previous method, this method uses a bidirectional neural network to obtain word representations in the sentence. It considers contiguous fragments of sentences to align in the embedding space, which is more meaningful, interpretable, and not fixed in length. Generally an RNN considers the current word and the contexts from all the previously generated words for estimating a probability distribution of the next word in a sequence. However, this method extends it for considering the generative process on the content of an input image. This addition is simple, but it makes it very effective for generating novel image captions. Attributes of an image are considered as rich semantic cues. The method of Yao et al. BIB1868294 has different architectures to incorporate attributes with image representations. Mainly, two types of architectural representations are introduced here. In the first group, it inserts only attributes to the LSTM or image representations to the LSTM first and then attributes, and vice versa. In the second group, it can control the time step of the LSTM. It decides whether image representation and attributes will be input once or every time step. These variants of architectures are tested on the MS COCO dataset and common evaluation metrics. You et al. BIB3120635 proposed a semantic-attention-based image captioning method. The method provides a detailed, coherent description of semantically important objects. The top-down paradigms BIB6785090 BIB59605920 BIB59606130 BIB3511040 BIB3509328 BIB1169492 BIB1055111 are used for extracting visual features first and then convert them into words. In bottom-up approaches, BIB10282227 BIB13272863  BIB10315654 BIB6108541 BIB10702193 , visual concepts (e.g., regions, objects, and attributes) are extracted first from various aspects of an image and then combined. Fine details of an image are often very important for generating a description of an image. Top-down approaches have limitations in obtaining fine details of the image. Bottom-up approaches are capable of operating on any image resolution and therefore they can do work on fine details of the image. However, they have problems in formulating an end-to-end process. Therefore, semanticbased attention models applied both top-down and bottom-up approaches for generating image captions. In top-down approaches, the image features are obtained using the last 1,024-dimensional convolutional layer of the GoogleNet BIB206592484 CNN model. The visual concepts are collected using different nonparametric and parametric methods. The nearest neighbor image retrieval technique is used for computing nonparametric visual concepts. The fully convolutional network (FCN) BIB56507745 is used to learn attributes from local patches for parametric attribute prediction. Although Xu et al. BIB1055111 considered attention-based captioning, it works on fixed and predefined spatial location. However, this semantic-attention-based method can work on any resolution and any location of the image. Moreover, this method also considers a feedback process that accelerates to generate better image captions. Previous image captioning methods do not include high-level semantic concepts explicitly. However, Wu et al. BIB18548166 proposed a high-level semantic-concept-based image captioning. It uses an intermediate attribute prediction layer in a neural-network-based CNN-LSTM framework. First, attributes are extracted by a CNN-based classifier from training image captions. Then these attributes are used as high-level semantic concepts in generating semantically rich image captions. Recent semantic-concept-based image captioning methods BIB18548166 BIB3120635 applied the semantic concept detection process BIB2472547 to obtain explicit semantic concepts. They use these high-level semantic concepts in the CNN-LSTM-based encoder-decoder and achieve significant improvements in image captioning. However, they have problems in generating semantically sound captions. They cannot distribute semantic concepts evenly in the whole sentence. For example, Wu et al. BIB18548166 consider the initial state of the LSTM to add semantic concepts. Moreover, it encodes a visual feature vector or an inferred scene vector from the CNN and then feeds it to the LSTM for generating captions. However, Gan et al. BIB11045175 introduced a semantic compositional network (SCN) for image captioning. In this method, a semantic concept vector is constructed from all the probable concepts (called tags here) found in the image. This semantic vector has more potential than the visual feature vector and scene vector and can generate captions covering the overall meaning of the image. This is called a compositional network because it can compose most semantic concepts. Existing LSTM-based image captioning methods have limitations in generating a diverse set of captions because they have to predict the next word in a predefined word-by-word format. However, a combination of attributes and subjects and their relationship in a sentence irrespective of their location can generate a broad range of image captions. Wang et al. BIB764110 proposed a method that locates the objects and their interactions first and then identifies and extracts the relevant attributes to generate image captions. The main aim of this method is to decompose the ground-truth image captions into two parts: skeleton sentences and attribute phrases. The method is also called Skeleton Key. The architecture of this method has ResNet BIB206594692 and two LSTMs called Skel-LSTM and Attr-LSTM. During training, skeleton sentences are trained by the Skel-LSTM network and attribute phrases are trained by the Attr-LSTM network. In the testing phase, skeleton sentences are generated first that contain the words for the main objects of the image and their relationships. Then these objects look back through the image again to obtain the relevant attributes. It is tested on the MS COCO dataset and a new Stock3M dataset and can generate more accurate and novel captions.