Image captioning intersects computer vision and natural language processing (NLP) research. NLP tasks, in general, can be formulated as a sequence-to-sequence learning. Several neural language models such as neural probabilistic language models BIB2852525 , log-bilinear models BIB577005 , skip-gram models BIB5959482 , and RNNs BIB17048224 have been proposed for learning sequence-to-sequence tasks. RNNs have widely been used in various sequence learning tasks. However, traditional RNNs suffer from vanishing and exploding gradient problems and cannot adequately handle long-term temporal dependencies. LSTM BIB1915014 networks are a type of RNN that have special units in addition to standard units. LSTM units use a memory cell that can maintain information in memory for long periods of time. In recent years, LSTM-based models have dominantly been used in sequence-to-sequence learning tasks. Another network, the gated recurrent unit (GRU) BIB5201925 , has a similar structure to LSTM but it does not use separate memory cells and uses fewer gates to control the flow of information. However, LSTMs ignore the underlying hierarchical structure of a sentence. They also require significant storage due to long-term dependencies through a memory cell. In contrast, CNNs can learn the internal hierarchical structure of the sentences and are faster in processing than LSTMs. Therefore, recently, convolutional architectures have been used in other sequence-to-sequence tasks, e.g., conditional image generation BIB14989939 and machine translation BIB6728280 BIB3648736 BIB13756489 . Inspired by the above success of CNNs in sequence learning tasks, Gu et al. BIB3928398 proposed a CNN language model-based image captioning method. This method uses a language CNN for statistical language modeling. However, the method cannot model the dynamic temporal behavior of the language model only using a language CNN. It combines a recurrent network with the language CNN to model the temporal dependencies properly. Aneja et al. BIB35543299 proposed a convolutional architecture for the task of image captioning. They use a feed-forward network without any recurrent function. The architecture of the method has four components: (1) input embedding layer, (2) image embedding layer, (3) convolutional module, and (4) output embedding layer. It also uses an attention mechanism to leverage spatial image features. They evaluate their architecture on the challenging MS COCO dataset and show comparable performance to an LSTM-based method on standard metrics. Wang et al. BIB43944157 proposed another CNN+CNN-based image captioning method. It is similar to the method of Aneja et al. except that it uses a hierarchical attention module to connect the vision CNN with the language CNN. The authors of this method also investigate the use of various hyperparameters, including the number of layers and the kernel width of the language CNN. They show that the influence of the hyperparameters can improve the performance of the method in image captioning.