Captioning. The previous image captioning methods can generate only one caption for the whole image. They use different regions of the image to obtain information of various objects. However, these methods do not generate region-wise captions. Johnson et al. BIB14521054 proposed an image captioning method called DenseCap. This method localizes all the salient regions of an image and then generates descriptions for those regions. A typical method of this category has the following steps: (1) Region proposals are generated for the different regions of the given image. (2) CNN is used to obtain the region-based image features. (3) The outputs of Step 2 are used by a language model to generate captions for every region. A block diagram of a typical dense captioning method is given in Figure 4 . Dense captioning BIB14521054 proposes a fully convolutional localization network architecture, which is composed of a convolutional network, a dense localization layer, and an LSTM BIB1915014 language model. The dense localization layer processes an image with a single, efficient forward pass, which implicitly predicts a set of regions of interest in the image. Thereby, it requires no external region proposals unlike Fast R-CNN or a full network (i.e., RPN (Region Proposal Network BIB206770307 )) of Faster R-CNN. The working principle of the localization layer is related to the work of Faster R-CNN BIB10328909 . However, Johnson et al. BIB14521054 use a differential, spatial soft attention mechanism BIB1930231 BIB6099034 and bilinear interpolation BIB6099034 instead of an ROI pooling mechanism BIB206770307 . This modification helps the method to backpropagate through the network and smoothly select the active regions. It uses the Visual Genome  dataset for the experiments in generating region-level image captions. One description of the entire visual scene is quite subjective and is not enough to bring out the complete understanding. Region-based descriptions are more objective and detailed than global image description. The region-based description is known as dense captioning. There are some challenges in dense captioning. As regions are dense, one object may have multiple overlapping regions of interest. Moreover, it is very difficult to recognize each target region for all the visual concepts. Yang et al. BIB1189091 proposed another dense captioning method that can tackle these challenges. First, it addresses an inference mechanism that jointly depends on the visual features of the region and the predicted captions for that region. This allows the model to find an appropriate position of the bounding box. Second, they apply a context fusion that can combine context features with the visual features of respective regions to provide a rich semantic description.