Reinforcement-learning (RL)-based and GAN-based methods are becoming increasingly popular. We name them as "other deep-learning-based image captioning." The results of the methods of this group are shown in Table 5 . The methods do not have results on commonly used evaluation metrics. However, they have their own potential to generate the descriptions for the image. Shetty et al. BIB6093112 employed adversarial training in their image captioning method. This method is capable of generating diverse captions. The captions are less biased with the ground-truth captions compared to the methods using maximum likelihood estimation. To take the advantage of RL, Ren et al. proposed a method that can predict all possible next words for the current word in the current time step. This mechanism helps them to generate contextually more accurate captions. Actor-critics of RL are similar to the generator and the discriminator of GAN. However, at the beginning of the training, both actor and critic do not have any knowledge about data. Zhang et al.  proposed an actor-critic-based image captioning method. This method is capable of predicting the ultimate captions at its early stage and can generate more accurate captions than other reinforcement-learning-based methods. We found that the performance of a technique can vary across different metrics. Table 6 shows the methods based on the top two scores on every individual evaluation metric. For example, Lu et al. BIB18347865 , Gan et al. BIB11045175 , and Zhang et al.  are within the top two methods based on the scores achieved on the BLEU-n and METEOR metrics. The BLEU-n metrics use variable-length phrases of generated captions to match against ground-truth captions. METEOR BIB7164502 considers the precision, recall, and alignments of the matched tokens. Therefore, the generated captions by these methods have good precision and recall accuracy, as well as good similarity in word level. ROUGE-L evaluates the adequacy and fluency of generated captions, whereas CIDEr focuses on grammaticality and saliency. SPICE can analyze the semantics of the generated captions. Zhang et al.  , Rennie et al. BIB206594923 , and Lu et al. BIB18347865 can generate captions, which have adequacy, fluency, and saliency and are more grammatically correct than other methods in Table 6 . Gu et al. BIB3928398 and Yao et al. BIB1868294 perform well in generating semantically correct captions.