A number of datasets are used for training, testing, and evaluating the image captioning methods. The datasets differ in various perspectives, such as the number of images, the number of captions per image, format of the captions, and image size. Three datasets, Flickr8K BIB928608 , Flickr30K BIB52852191 , and MS COCO BIB14113767 , are popularly used. These datasets, together with others, are described in Section 4.1. In this section, we show sample images with their captions generated by image captioning methods on the MS COCO, Flickr30K, and Flickr8K datasets. A number of evaluation metrics are used to measure the quality of the generated captions compared to the ground truth. Each metric applies its own technique for computation and has distinct advantages. The commonly used evaluation metrics are discussed in Section 4.2. A summary of deep-learning-based image captioning methods with their datasets and evaluation metrics are listed in Table 2 . BIB14113767 is a very large dataset for image recognition, segmentation, and captioning. There are various features of the MS COCO dataset such as object segmentation, recognition in context, multiple objects per class, more than 300,000 images, more than 2 million instances, 80 object categories, and five captions per image. Many image captioning methods BIB665667 BIB23414983 BIB17326626 BIB15143565 BIB2899486 BIB6093112 BIB13960547 BIB91460 BIB6530643 BIB9256367 BIB3120635 use the dataset in their experiments. For example, Wu et al. BIB6530643 use the MS COCO dataset in their method, and the generated captions of two sample images are shown in Figure 11 .