EVALUATION METRICS While formal experimental evaluation was left out of the scope of this article, we present a brief analysis of the experimental results and the performance of various techniques as reported. We cover three sets of results: (1) We find that a number of methods use the first three datasets listed in Section 4.1 and a number of commonly used evaluation metrics to present the results. These results are shown in Table 3 . (2) A few methods fall into the following groups: attention-based and other deep-learningbased (reinforcement learning and GAN-based methods) image captioning. The results of such methods are shown in Tables 4 and 5, respectively. (3) We also list the methods that provide the top two results scored on each evaluation metric on the MS COCO dataset. These results are shown in Table 6 . BIB7502269 . The main reason behind this is that it uses an attention mechanism, which focuses only on relevant objects of the image. The semantic-conceptbased methods can generate semantically rich captions. Wu et al. BIB9256367 proposed a semanticconcept-based image captioning method. This method first predicts the attributes of different objects from the image and then adds these attributes with the captions that are semantically meaningful. In terms of performance, the method is superior to all the methods mentioned in Table 3 . Table 4 shows the results of attention-based based methods on the MS COCO dataset. Xu et al.'s stochastic hard attention produced better results than deterministic soft attention. However, these results were outperformed by the method of Jin et al. BIB17326626 , which can update its attention based on the scene-specific context. Wu et al. BIB9256367 and Pedersoli et al. BIB15143565 only show BLEU-4 and METEOR scores, which are higher than the aforementioned methods. The method of Wu et al. uses an attention mechanism with a review process. The review process checks the focused attention in every time step and updates it if necessary. This mechanism helps to achieve better results than the prior attention-based methods. Pedersoli et al. propose a different attention mechanism that maps the focused image regions directly with the caption words instead of the LSTM state. The behavior of this method drives it to achieve top performances among the mentioned attention-based methods in Table 4 .