Architecture-Based Image Captioning. Compositional architecture-based methods are composed of several independent functional building blocks: First, a CNN is used to extract the semantic concepts from the image. Then a language model is used to generate a set of candidate captions. In generating the final caption, these candidate captions are reranked using a deep multimodal similarity model. A typical method of this category maintains the following steps: (1) Image features are obtained using a CNN. (3) Multiple captions are generated by a language model using the information of Step 1 and Step 2. (4) The generated captions are reranked using a deep multimodal similarity model to select high-quality image captions. A common block diagram of compositional network-based image captioning methods is given in Figure 6 . Fang et al. BIB9254582 introduced generation-based image captioning. It uses visual detectors, a language model, and a multimodal similarity model to train the model on an image captioning dataset. Image captions can contain nouns, verbs, and adjectives. A vocabulary is formed using the 1,000 most common words from the training captions. The system works with the image subregions rather that the full image. Convolutional neural networks (both AlexNet BIB207763512 and VGG16Net) are used for extracting features for the subregions of an image. The features of subregions are mapped with the words of the vocabulary that are likely to be contained in the image captions. Multiple instance learning (MIL) BIB8516600 is used to train the model for learning discriminative visual signatures of each word. A maximum entropy (ME) BIB1085832 language model is used for generating image captions from these words. Generated captions are ranked by a linear weighting of sentence features. Minimum error rate training (MERT) BIB5474833 is used to learn these weights. Similarities between image and sentence can be easily measured using a common vector representation. Image and sentence fragments are mapped with the common vector representation by a deep multimodal similarity model (DMSM). It achieves a significant improvement in choosing high-quality image captions. Until now, a significant number of methods have achieved satisfactory progress in generating image captions. The methods use training and testing samples from the same domain. Therefore, there is no certainty that these methods can perform well in open-domain images. Moreover, they are only good at recognizing generic visual content. There are certain key entities such as celebrities and landmarks that are out of their scope. The generated captions of these methods are evaluated on automatic metrics such as BLEU BIB11080756 , METEOR BIB870211 , and CIDEr BIB9026666 . These evaluation metrics have already shown good results on these methods. However, in terms of performance, there exists a large gap between the evaluation of the metrics and human judgment of evaluation BIB7647892 BIB7988167  . If it is considered real-life entity information, the performance could be weaker. However, Tran et al. BIB13960547 introduced a different image captioning method. This method is capable of generating image captions even for open-domain images. It can detect a diverse set of visual concepts and generate captions for celebrities and landmarks. It uses an external knowledge base, Freebase BIB207167677 , in recognizing a broad range of entities such as celebrities and landmarks. A series of human judgments are applied for evaluating the performances of generated captions. In experiments, it uses three datasets: MS COCO, Adobe-MIT FiveK BIB195597810 , and images from Instagram. The images of the MS COCO dataset were collected from the same domain, but the images of other datasets were chosen from an open domain. The method achieves notable performances especially on the challenging Instagram dataset. Ma et al. BIB8810688 proposed another compositional network-based image captioning method. This method uses structural words <object, attribute, activity, scene> to generate semantically meaningful descriptions. It also uses a multitask method similar to the multiple instance learning method BIB9254582 and multilayer optimization method BIB11262796 to generate structural words. An LSTM encoderdecoder-based machine translation method BIB7961699 is then used to translate the structural words into image captions. Wang et al. BIB206814904 proposed a parallel-fusion RNN-LSTM architecture for image caption generation. The architecture of the method divides the hidden units of RNN and LSTM into a number of same-size parts. The parts work in parallel with corresponding ratios to generate image captions.