Architecture-Based Image Captioning. The neural-network-based image captioning methods work in a simple end-to-end manner. These methods are very similar to the encoder-decoder framework-based neural machine translation BIB7961699 . In this network, global image features are extracted from the hidden activations of CNN and then fed into an LSTM to generate a sequence of words. A typical method of this category has the following general steps: (1) A vanilla CNN is used to obtain the scene type and to detect the objects and their relationships. (2) The output of Step 1 is used by a language model to convert them into words and combined phrases that produce an image caption. A simple block diagram of this category is given in Figure 5 . Vinyals et al. BIB1169492 proposed a method called Neural Image Caption Generator (NIC). The method uses a CNN for image representations and an LSTM for generating image captions. This special CNN uses a novel method for batch normalization, and the output of the last hidden layer of CNN is used as an input to the LSTM decoder. This LSTM is capable of keeping track of the objects that already have been described using text. NIC is trained based on maximum likelihood estimation. In generating image captions, image information is included in the initial state of an LSTM. The next words are generated based on the current time step and the previous hidden state. This process continues until it gets the end token of the sentence. Since image information is fed only at the beginning of the process, it may face vanishing gradient problems. The role of the words generated at the beginning is also becoming weaker and weaker. Therefore, LSTM is still facing challenges in generating long-length sentences BIB11212020  . Therefore, Jia et al. BIB7502269 proposed an extension of LSTM called guided LSTM (gLSTM). This gLSTM can generate long sentences. In this architecture, it adds global semantic information to each gate and cell state of LSTM. It also considers different length normalization strategies to control the length of captions. Semantic information is extracted in different ways. First, it uses a cross-modal retrieval task for retrieving image captions, and then semantic information is extracted from these captions. The semantic-based information can also be extracted using a multimodal embedding space. Mao et al. BIB8745888 proposed a special type of text generation method for images. This method can generate a description for a specific object or region that is called a referring expression BIB9682853 BIB9497011 BIB6308361 BIB7198177 BIB6034383 BIB1847966 BIB9460079 . Using this expression, it can then infer the object or region that is being described. Therefore, a generated description or expression is quite unambiguous. In order to address the referring expression, this method uses a new dataset called the ReferIt dataset BIB6308361 based on the popular MS COCO dataset. Previous CNN-RNN-based image captioning methods use LSTMs that are unidirectional and relatively shallow in depth. In unidirectional language generation techniques, the next word is predicted based on visual context and all the previous textual contexts. Unidirectional LSTM cannot generate contextually well-formed captions. Moreover, recent object detection and classification methods BIB207763512 BIB14124313 show that deep, hierarchical methods are better at learning than shallower ones. Wang et al. BIB91460 proposed a deep bidirectional LSTM-based method for image captioning. This method is capable of generating contextually and semantically rich image captions. The proposed architecture consists of a CNN and two separate LSTM networks. It can utilize both past and future context information to learn long-term visual language interactions.