Captioning. Neural encoder-decoder-based approaches were mainly used in machine translation BIB7961699 . Following these trends, they have also been used for the task of image captioning and found very effective. In image captioning, a CNN is used as an encoder to extract the visual features from the input image and an RNN is used as a decoder to convert this representation word by word into a natural language description of the image. However, these methods are unable to analyze the image over time while they generate the descriptions for the image. In addition to this, the methods do not consider the spatial aspects of the image that are relevant to the parts of the image captions. Instead, they generate captions considering the scene as a whole. Attention-based mechanisms are becoming increasingly popular in deep learning because they can address these limitations. They can dynamically focus on the various parts of the input image while the output sequences are being produced. A typical method of this category adopts the following steps: (1) Image information is obtained based on the whole scene by a CNN. (2) The language generation phase generates words or phrases based on the output of Step 1. (3) Salient regions of the given image are focused in each time step of the language generation model based on generated words or phrases. (4) Captions are updated dynamically until the end state of the language generation model. A block diagram of the attention-based image captioning method is shown in Figure 7 . Xu et al. BIB1055111 were the first to introduce an attention-based image captioning method. The method describes the salient contents of an image automatically. The main difference between the attention-based methods and other methods is that they can concentrate on the salient parts of the image and generate the corresponding words at the same time. This method applies two different techniques: stochastic hard attention and deterministic soft attention to generate attention. Most CNN-based approaches use the top layer of ConvNet for extracting information of the salient objects from the image. A drawback of these techniques is that they may lose certain information that is useful to generate detailed captions. In order to preserve the information, the attention method uses features from the lower convolutional layer instead of the fully connected layer. Jin et al. BIB17326626 proposed another attention-based image captioning method. This method is capable of extracting the flow of abstract meaning based on the semantic relationship between visual information and textual information. It can also obtain higher-level semantic information by proposing a scene-specific context. The main difference between this method and other attentionbased methods is that it introduces multiple visual regions of an image at multiple scales. This technique can extract proper visual information of a particular object. For extracting a scenespecific context, it first uses the latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) BIB3177797 for generating a dictionary from all the captions of the dataset. Then a multilayer perceptron is used to predict a topic vector for every image. A scene-factored LSTM that has two stacked layers is used to generate a description for the overall context of the image. Wu et al. BIB9256367 proposed a review-based attention method for image captioning. It introduces a review model that can perform multiple review steps with attention on CNN hidden states. The output of the CNN is a number of fact vectors that can obtain the global facts of the image. The vectors are given as input to the attention mechanism of the LSTM. For example, a reviewer module can first review: what are the objects in the image? Then it can review the relative positions of the objects and another review can extract the information of the overall context of the image. This information is passed to the decoder to generate image captions. Pedersoli et al. BIB15143565 proposed an area-based attention mechanism for image captioning. Previous attention-based methods map image regions only to the state of the RNN language model. However, this approach associates image regions with caption words given the RNN state. It can predict the next caption word and corresponding image region in each time step of RNN. It is capable of predicting the next word as well as corresponding image regions in each time step of RNN for generating image captions. In order to find the areas of attention, previous attention-based image caption methods used either the position of the CNN activation grid or object proposals. In contrast, this method uses an end-to-end trainable convolutional spatial transformer along with a CNN activation gird and object proposal methods. A combination of these techniques helps this method to compute image-adaptive areas of attention. In experiments, the method shows that this new attention mechanism together with the spatial transformer network can produce high-quality image captions. Lu et al. BIB18347865 proposed another attention-based image captioning method. The method is based on an adaptive attention model with a visual sentinel. Current attention-based image captioning methods focus on the image in every time step of RNN. However, there are some words or phrases (e.g., "a," "of") that do not need to attend visual signals. Moreover, these unnecessary visual signals could affect the caption generation process and degrade the overall performance. Therefore, their proposed method can determine when it will focus on an image region and when it will just focus on a language generation model. Once it determines to focus on the image, then it must have to choose the spatial location of the image. The first contribution of this method is to introduce a novel spatial attention method that can compute spatial features from the image. Then, in their adaptive attention method, they introduced a new LSTM extension. Generally, an LSTM works as a decoder that can produce a hidden state at every time step. However, this extension is capable of producing an additional visual sentinel that provides a fall-back option to the decoder. It also has a sentinel gate that can control how much information the decoder will get from the image. While attention-based methods look to find the different areas of the image at the time of generating words or phrases for image captions, the attention maps generated by these methods cannot always correspond to the proper region of the image. It can affect the performance of image caption generation. Liu et al. BIB14223891 proposed a method for neural image captioning. This method can evaluate and correct the attention map at time steps. Correctness means making a consistent map between image regions and generated words. In order to achieve these goals, this method introduced a quantitative evaluation metric to compute the attention maps. It uses the Flickr30K entity dataset BIB52852191 and the MS COCO BIB14113767 dataset for measuring both a ground-truth attention map and semantic labelings of image regions. In order to learn a better attention function, it proposed a supervised attention model. Two types of supervised attention models are used here: strong supervision with alignment annotation and weak supervision with semantic labeling. In the strong supervision with alignment annotation model, it can directly map ground-truth words to a region. However, ground-truth alignment is not always possible because collecting and annotating data is often very expensive. Weak supervision is performed to use bounding box or segmentation masks on the MS COCO dataset. In experiments, the method shows that the supervised attention model performs better in mapping attention as well as image captioning. Chen et al. BIB206596371 proposed another attention-based image captioning method. This method considers both spatial and channel-wise attentions to compute an attention map. The existing attention-based image captioning methods only consider spatial information for generating an attention map. A common drawback of these spatial attention methods is that they compute weighted pooling only on attentive feature maps. As a result, these methods lose the spatial information gradually. Moreover, they use the spatial information only from the last conv-layer of the CNN. The receptive field regions of this layer are quite large, which limits the gap between the regions. Therefore, they do not get significant spatial attention for an image. However, in this method, CNN features are extracted not only from spatial locations but also from different channels and multiple layers. Therefore, it gets significant spatial attention. In addition to this, in this method, each filter of a convolutional layer acts as a semantic detector BIB3960646 , while other methods use external sources for obtaining semantic information. In order to reduce the gap between the human-generated description and machine-generated description, Tavakoli et al. BIB19158922 introduced an attention-based image captioning method. This is a bottom-up saliency-based attention model that can take advantage of comparisons with other attention-based image captioning methods. It found that humans first describe the more important objects before less important ones. It also shows that the method performs better on unseen data. Most previous image captioning methods applied a top-down approach for constructing a visual attention map. These mechanisms typically focused on some selective regions obtained from the output of one or two layers of a CNN. The input regions are of the same size and have the same shape of receptive field. This approach has little consideration for the content of the image. However, the method of Anderson et al.  applied both top-down and bottom-up approaches. The bottom-up attention mechanism uses Faster R-CNN BIB10328909 for region proposals that can select salient regions of an image. Therefore, this method can attend to both object-level regions and other salient image regions. Park et al. BIB17618504 introduced a different type of attention-based image captioning method. This method can generate image captions addressing personal issues of an image. It mainly considers two tasks: hashtag prediction and post generation. This method uses a context sequence memory network (CSMN) to obtain the context information from the image. Descriptions of an image from a personalized view have a lot of applications in social media networks. For example, everyday people share a lot of images as posts on Facebook, Instagram, or other social media. Photo taking or uploading is a very easy task. However, describing the images is not easy because it requires a theme, sentiment, and context of the image. Therefore, the method considers past knowledge about the user's vocabularies or writing styles from the prior documents for generating image descriptions. In order to work with this new type of image captioning, the CSMN method has three contributions: First, the memory of this network can work as a repository and retain multiple types of context information. Second, the memory is designed in such a way that it can store all the previously generated words sequentially. As a result, it does not suffer from the vanishing gradient problem. Third, the proposed CNN can correlate with multiple memory slots, which is helpful for understanding contextual concepts. Attention-based methods have already shown good performance and efficiency in image captioning as well as other computer vision tasks. However, attention maps generated by these attention-based methods are only machine dependent. They do not consider any supervision from human attention. This creates the necessity to think about the gaze information and whether it can improve the performance of these attention methods in image captioning. Gaze indicates the cognition and perception of humans about a scene. Human gaze can identify the important locations of objects in an image. Thus, gaze mechanisms have already shown their potential performances in eye-based user modeling BIB1921738 BIB11949986 BIB14119147 BIB14371147 BIB8815045 , object localization  or recognition BIB8636060 , and holistic scene understanding BIB1128810 BIB12428344 . However, Sugano et al. BIB13903325 claimed that gaze information has not yet been integrated in image captioning methods. This method introduced human gaze with the attention mechanism of deep neural networks in generating image captions. The method incorporates human gaze information into an attention-based LSTM model BIB1055111 . For experiments, it uses the SALICON dataset BIB5864146 and achieves good results.