Existing image captioning systems generate captions based on only the image content, which can also be called factual descriptions. They do not consider the stylized part of the text separately from other linguistic patterns. However, the stylized captions can be more expressive and attractive than only the flat description of an image. The methods of this category have the following general steps: (1) The CNN-based image encoder is used to obtain the image information. (2) A separate text corpus is prepared to extract various stylized concepts (e.g., romantic, humorous) from training data. A simple block diagram of stylized image captioning is given in Figure 10 . Such captions have become popular because they are particularly valuable for many real-world applications. For example, everyday people are uploading a lot of photos in different social media. The photos need stylized and attractive descriptions. Gan et al. BIB23414983 proposed a novel image captioning system called StyleNet. This method can generate attractive captions, adding various styles. The architecture of this method consists of a CNN and a factored LSTM that can separate factual and style factors from the captions. It uses multitask sequence-to-sequence training BIB6954272 for identifying the style factors and then adds these factors at runtime to generate attractive captions. More interestingly, it uses an external monolingual stylized language corpus for training instead of paired images. However, it uses a new stylized image caption dataset called FlickrStyle10K and can generate captions with different styles. Existing image captioning methods consider the factual description about the objects and scene and their interactions in an image in generating image captions. In our day-to-day conversations, communications, interpersonal relationships, and decision making, we use various stylized and nonfactual expressions such as emotions, pride, and shame. However, Mathews et al. BIB2875390 claimed that automatic image descriptions are missing these nonfactual aspects. Therefore, they proposed a method called SentiCap. This method can generate image descriptions with positive or negative sentiments. It introduces a novel switching RNN model that combines two CNN+RNNs running in parallel. In each time step, this switching model generates the probability of switching between two RNNs. One generates captions considering the factual words and the other considers the words with sentiments. It then takes inputs from the hidden states of both RNNs for generating captions. This method can generate captions successfully given the appropriate sentiments.