Deep-Learning-Based Image Captioning. In our day-to-day lives, unlabeled data are increasing because it is often impractical to accurately annotate data. Therefore, recently, researchers have been focusing more on reinforcement learning and unsupervised-learning-based techniques for image captioning. A reinforcement learning approach is designed by a number of parameters such as agent, state, action, reward function, policy, and value. The agent chooses an action, receives reward values, and moves to a new state. Policies are defined by actions and values are defined by reward functions. The agent attempts to select the action with the expectation of having a maximum long-term reward. It needs continuous state and action information to provide the guarantees of a reward function. Traditional reinforcement learning approaches face a number of limitations such as the lack of guarantees of a reward function and uncertain state-action information. Policy gradient methods BIB1211821 are a type of reinforcement learning that can choose a specific policy for a specific action using gradient descent and optimization techniques. The policy can incorporate domain knowledge for the action that guarantees convergence. Thus, policy gradient methods require fewer parameters than reward-function-based approaches. Existing deep-learning-based image captioning methods use variants of image encoders to extract image features. The features are then fed into the neural-network-based language decoders to generate captions. The methods have two main issues: (1) They are trained using maximum likelihood estimation and backpropagation BIB7147309 approaches. In this case, the next word is predicted given the image and all the previously generated ground-truth words. Therefore, the generated captions look like ground-truth captions. This phenomenon is called the exposure bias BIB1820089 problem. (2) Evaluation metrics at test time are nondifferentiable. Ideally sequence models for image captioning should be trained to avoid exposure bias and directly optimize metrics for the test time. A typical architecture of reinforcement-learning-based image captioning method has two networks: (1) the policy network and (2) the value network. Sometimes they are referred to as actor and critic, respectively. The critic (value network) can be used in estimating the expected future reward to train the actor (captioning policy network). Reinforcement-learning-based image captioning methods sample the next token from the model based on the rewards they receive in each state. Policy gradient methods in reinforcement learning can optimize the gradient in order to predict the cumulative long-term rewards. Therefore, it can solve the nondifferentiable problem of evaluation metrics. The methods in this category follow the following steps: (1) A CNN-and RNN-based combined network generates captions. (2) Another CNN-RNN-based network evaluates the captions and sends feedback to the first network to generate high-quality captions. A block diagram of a typical method of this category is shown in Figure 3 . Ren et al. BIB2899486 introduced a novel reinforcement-learning-based image captioning method. The architecture of this method has two networks that jointly compute the next best word at each time step. The "policy network" works as local guidance and helps to predict the next word based on the current state. The "value network"' works as global guidance and evaluates the reward value considering all the possible extensions of the current state. This mechanism is able to adjust the networks in predicting the correct words. Therefore, it can generate good captions similar to ground-truth captions at the end. It uses an actor-critic reinforcement learning model BIB207079270 to train the whole network. Visual semantic embedding BIB52269605 BIB6631177 is used to compute the actual reward value in predicting the correct word. It also helps to measure the similarity between images and sentences that can evaluate the correctness of generated captions. Rennie et al. BIB206594923 proposed another reinforcement-learning-based image captioning method. The method utilizes the test-time inference algorithm to normalize the reward rather than estimating the reward signal and normalization in training time. It shows that this test-time decoding is highly effective for generating quality image captions. Zhang et al.  proposed an actor-critic reinforcement-learning-based image captioning method. The method can directly optimize nondifferentiable problems of the existing evaluation metrics. The architecture of the actor-critic method consists of a policy network (actor) and a value network (critic). The actor treats the job as a sequential decision problem and can predict the next token of the sequence. In each state of the sequence, the network will receive a task-specific reward (in this case, the evaluation metrics score). The job of the critic is to predict the reward. If it can predict the expected reward, the actor will continue to sample outputs according to its probability distribution. GAN-based methods can learn deep features from unlabeled data. They achieve this representation applying a competitive process between a pair of networks: the generator and the discriminator. GANs have already been used successfully in a variety of applications, including image captioning BIB665667 BIB6093112 , image-to-image translation BIB6200260 , text-to-image synthesis BIB24786700 BIB1563370 , and text generation BIB3655946 BIB39956959 . There are two issues with GAN. First, GAN can work well in generating natural images from real images because GANs are proposed for real-valued data. However, text processing is based on discrete numbers. Therefore, such operations are nondifferentiable, making it difficult to apply backpropagation directly. Policy gradients apply a parametric function to allow gradients to be backpropagated. Second, the evaluator faces problems in vanishing gradients and error propagation for sequence generation. It needs a probable future reward value for every partial description. Monte Carlo rollouts BIB3439214 are used to compute this future reward value. GAN-based image captioning methods can generate a diverse set of image captions in contrast to the model based on conventional deep convolutional networks and deep recurrent networks. Dai et al. BIB665667 also proposed a GAN-based image captioning method. However, they do not consider multiple captions for a single image. Shetty et al. BIB6093112 introduced a new GAN-based image captioning method. This method can generate multiple captions for a single image and showed impressive improvements in generating diverse captions. GANs have limitations in backpropagating the discrete data. The Gumbel sampler BIB2428314 BIB14307651 is used to overcome the discrete data problem. The two main parts of this adversarial network are the generator and the discriminator. During training, the generator learns the loss value provided by the discriminator instead of learning it from explicit sources. The discriminator has true data distribution and can discriminate between generator-generated samples and true data samples. This allows the network to learn diverse data distribution. Moreover, the network classifies the generated caption sets, either real or fake. Thus, it can generate captions similar to human-generated ones.