Space. The architecture of a typical multimodal space-based method contains a language encoder part, a vision part, a multimodal space part, and a language decoder part. A general diagram of multimodal space-based image captioning methods is shown in Figure 2 . The vision part uses a deep convolutional neural network as a feature extractor to extract the image features. The language encoder part extracts the word features and learns a dense feature embedding for each word. It then forwards the semantic temporal context to the recurrent layers. The multimodal space part maps the image features into a common space with the word features. BIB3509328 AlexNet, VGGNet RNN MS, SL, WS Chen et al. 2015 BIB6785090 VGGNet RNN VS, SL, WS, EDA Fang et al. 2015 BIB9254582 AlexNet, VGGNet MELM VS, SL, WS, CA Jia et al. 2015 BIB7502269 VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA Karpathy et al. 2015 BIB59606130 VGGNet RNN MS, SL, WS, EDA Vinyals et al. 2015 BIB1169492 GoogLeNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA Xu et al. 2015 BIB1055111 AlexNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA, AB Jin et al. 2015 BIB17326626 VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA, AB Wu et al. 2016 BIB9256367 VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA, AB Sugano et at. 2016 BIB13903325 VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA, AB Mathews et al. 2016 BIB2875390 GoogLeNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA, SC Wang et al. 2016 BIB91460 AlexNet, VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA Johnson et al. 2016 BIB14521054 VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, DC, EDA Mao et al. 2016 BIB8745888 VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA Wang et al. 2016 BIB206814904 VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, CA Tran et al. 2016 BIB13960547 ResNet MELM VS, SL, WS, CA Ma et al. 2016 BIB8810688 AlexNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, CA You et al. 2016 BIB3120635 GoogLeNet RNN VS, SL, WS, EDA, SCB Yang et al. 2016 BIB1189091 VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, DC, EDA Anne et al. 2016 BIB6918332 VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, CA, NOB Yao et al. 2017 BIB1868294 GoogLeNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA, SCB Lu et al. 2017 BIB18347865 ResNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA, AB Chen et al. 2017 BIB206596371 VGGNet, ResNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA, AB Gan et al. 2017 BIB11045175 ResNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, CA, SCB Pedersoli et al. 2017 BIB15143565 VGGNet RNN VS, SL, WS, EDA, AB Ren et al. 2017 BIB2899486 VGGNet LSTM VS, ODL, WS, EDA Park et al. 2017 BIB17618504 ResNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA, AB Wang et al. 2017 BIB764110 ResNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA Tavakoli et al. 2017 BIB19158922 VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA, AB Liu et al. 2017 BIB14223891 VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA, AB Gan et al. 2017 BIB23414983 ResNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA, SC Dai et al. 2017 BIB665667 VGGNet LSTM VS, ODL, WS, EDA Shetty et al. 2017 BIB6093112 GoogLeNet LSTM VS, ODL, WS, EDA Liu et al. 2017 BIB3873857 Inception-V3 LSTM VS, ODL, WS, EDA Gu et al. 2017 [ BIB8457705 VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, CA, NOB Zhang et al. 2017  Inception-V3 LSTM VS, ODL, WS, EDA Wu et al. 2018 BIB18548166 VGGNet LSTM VS, SL, WS, EDA, SCB Aneja et al. 2018 BIB35543299 VGGNet Language CNN VS, SL, WS, EDA Wang et al. 2018 BIB43944157 VGGNet The resulting map is then passed to the language decoder, which generates captions by decoding the map. The methods in this category follow the following steps: (1) Deep neural networks and the multimodal neural language model are used to learn both image and text jointly in a multimodal space. BIB5223711 The language generation part generates captions using the information from Step 1. An initial work in this area was proposed by Kiros et al. BIB12365096 . The method applies a CNN for extracting image features in generating image captions. It uses a multimodal space that represents both image and text jointly for multimodal representation learning and image caption generation. It also introduces the multimodal neural language models such as the Modality-Biased Log-Bilinear Model (MLBL-B) and the Factored Three-Way Log-Bilinear Model (MLBL-F) of BIB577005 followed by AlexNet BIB207763512 . Unlike most previous approaches, this method does not rely on any additional templates, structures, or constraints. Instead, it depends on the high-level image features and word representations learned from deep neural networks and multimodal neural language models, respectively. The neural language models have limitations in handling a large amount of data and are inefficient to work with long-term memory BIB260422 . Kiros et al. BIB12365096 extended their work in BIB7732372 to learn a joint image sentence embedding where LSTM is used for sentence encoding and a new neural language model called the Structure-Content Neural Language Model (SC-NLM) is used for image caption generations. The SC-NLM has an advantage over existing methods in that it can extricate the structure of the sentence to its content produced by the encoder. It also helps to achieve significant improvements in generating realistic image captions over the approach proposed by BIB12365096 . Karpathy et al. BIB2315434 proposed a deep, multimodal model embedding of image and natural language data for the task of bidirectional images and sentences retrieval. The previous multimodal-based methods used a common embedding space that directly maps images and sentences. However, this method works at a finer level and embeds fragments of images and fragments of sentences. This method breaks down the images into a number of objects and sentences into a dependency tree relation (DTR) BIB3102322 and reasons about their latent intermodal alignment. It shows that the method achieves significant improvements in the retrieval task compared to other previous methods. This method has a few limitations as well. In terms of modeling, the dependency tree can model relations easily, but they are not always appropriate. For example, a single visual entity might be described by a single complex phrase that can be split into multiple sentence fragments. The phrase "black and white dog" can be formed into two relations: (CONJ, black, white) and (AMOD, white, dog). Again, for many dependency relations we do not find any clear mapping in the image (e.g., "each other" cannot be mapped to any object). Mao et al. BIB3509328 proposed a multimodal recurrent neural network (m-RNN) method for generating novel image captions. This method has two subnetworks: a deep recurrent neural network for sentences and a deep convolutional network for images. These two subnetworks interact with each other in a multimodal layer to form the whole m-RNN model. Both the image and fragments of sentences are given as input in this method. It calculates the probability distribution to generate the next word of the caption. There are five more layers in this model: two word embedding layers, a recurrent layer, a multimodal layer, and a SoftMax layer. Kiros et al. BIB12365096 proposed a method that is built on a Log-Bilinear Model and used AlexNet to extract visual features. This multimodal recurrent neural network method is closely related to the method of Kiros et al. BIB12365096 . Kiros et al. use a fixed-length context (i.e., five words), whereas in this method, the temporal context is stored in a recurrent architecture, which allows an arbitrary context length. The two word-embedding layers use one hot vector to generate a dense word representation. It encodes both the syntactic and semantic meaning of the words. The semantically relevant words can be found by calculating the Euclidean distance between two dense word vectors in embedding layers. Most sentence-image multimodal methods BIB261138 BIB2315434 BIB7732372 BIB2317858 use precomputed word embedding vectors to initialize their model. In contrast, this method randomly initializes word embedding layers and learns them from the training data. This helps them to generate better image captions than the previous methods. Many image captioning methods BIB2315434 BIB12365096 BIB3527896 are built on recurrent neural networks at the contemporary times. They use a recurrent layer for storing visual information. However, m-RNN uses both image representations and sentence fragments to generate captions. It utilizes the capacity of the recurrent layer more efficiently, which helps to achieve better performance using a relatively small dimensional recurrent layer. Chen et al. BIB6785090 proposed another multimodal space-based image captioning method. The method can generate novel captions from images and restore visual features from the given description. It also can describe a bidirectional mapping between images and their captions. Many of the existing methods BIB928608 BIB2315434 BIB2317858 use joint embedding to generate image captions. However, they do not use reverse projection that can generate visual features from captions. On the other hand, this method dynamically updates the visual representations of the image from the generated words. It has an additional recurrent visual hidden layer with RNN that makes a reverse projection.