Case 1:20-cv-01838-CCB Document 38 Filed 06/29/20 Page 1 of 4
IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF MARYLAND

DEFY VENTURES, INC., et al., Plaintiffs,

CASE NO.: 20-cv-1838

v.

U.S. SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION, et al.,
Defendants.

UPDATE IN RESPONSE TO COURT’S REQUEST FOR CLARIFICATION AT JUNE 29, 2020 CONFERENCE CALL

Case 1:20-cv-01838-CCB Document 38 Filed 06/29/20 Page 2 of 4
In response to the Court’s request at today’s conference call, Plaintiffs submit the attached proposed order governing the scope of relief as to a stay of the CARES Act’s June 30, 2020, deadline for application to and approval for funding under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”).1
Plaintiffs respectfully request that the Court’s order apply only in the locations that Individual Plaintiffs and Plaintiffs Defy Ventures, Inc., operate: Maryland, New York, Connecticut, California, Illinois, Colorado, and Washington. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit affirmed just this month two important principles that justify this narrowed relief: (1) an organization such as Defy Ventures may suffer “cognizable injuries” due to harm to its organizational mission and diversion of resources by operation of a federal rule sufficient to establish standing; and (2) relief in such cases is appropriate at least covering the states or jurisdictions in which plaintiffs operate. See Cook Cty., Ill. v. Wolf, No. 19-3169, 2020 WL 3072046, at *3, 5, 17 (7th Cir. June 10, 2020). This relief is available and justified under traditional equitable principles. The court should tailor preliminary relief to afford “complete relief to Plaintiffs.” Califano v. Yamasaki, 442 U.S. 682, 702 (1979). As a result, a stay of the statutory PPP deadline is required in the jurisdictions where all plaintiffs reside.
A proposed order is attached.
1 Plaintiffs continue to believe that the relief requested in their moving papers is justified and that this Court is authorized to award it for the reasons given therein. Plaintiffs respond only to the Court’s question of the appropriate narrowing of relief assuming the June 24 Interim Final Rule is valid.

Case 1:20-cv-01838-CCB Document 38 Filed 06/29/20 Page 3 of 4

Dated:

June 29, 2020

Respectfully submitted,

/s/ Kali N. Bracey

ReNika C. Moore (Admitted PHV) Alejandro A. Ortiz (Admitted PHV) Jennesa Calvo-Friedman (Admitted PHV) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION FOUNDATION 125 Broad St., 18th Floor New York, NY 10004 Tel: (212) 549-2500 Fax: (212) 549-2654 RMoore@ACLU.org OrtizA@ACLU.org JCalvo-Friedman@ACLU.org
Joanna K. Wasik (Federal Bar No. 21063) Hannah E. M. Lieberman (Federal Bar No. 05456) WASHINGTON LAWYERS’ COMMITTEE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS AND URBAN AFFAIRS 700 14th St. NW, Ste 400 Washington, DC 20005 Tel.: (202) 319-1000 Fax: (202) 319-1010 Joanna_Wasik@washlaw.org Hannah_Lieberman@washlaw.org

Kali N. Bracey (Federal Bar No. 20752) Elizabeth B. Deutsch (Admitted PHV) JENNER & BLOCK LLP 1099 New York Avenue NW, Suite 900 Washington, DC 20001 Tel.: (202) 639-6000 Fax: (202) 639-6066 KBracey@Jenner.com EDeutsch@Jenner.com
Jacob D. Alderdice (Admitted PHV) JENNER & BLOCK LLP 919 Third Avenue New York, NY 10022 Tel.: (212) 891-1625 Fax: (212) 891-1699 JAlderdice@Jenner.com
Zachary D. Tripp (Admitted PHV) Lauren E. Morris (Admitted PHV) WEIL, GOTSHAL & MANGES LLP 2001 M Street, NW, Suite 600 Washington, DC 20036 Tel.: (202) 682-7000 Zack.Tripp@Weil.com Lauren.Morris@Weil.com

Claudia De Palma (Admitted PHV) PUBLIC INTEREST LAW CENTER 1500 JFK Blvd., Suite 802 Philadelphia, PA 19102 Tel: (215) 627-7100 cdepalma@pubintlaw.org

Robert B. Niles-Weed (Admitted PHV) WEIL, GOTSHAL & MANGES LLP 767 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10153 Tel.:(212) 310-8000 Robert.Niles-Weed@Weil.com

2

Case 1:20-cv-01838-CCB Document 38 Filed 06/29/20 Page 4 of 4
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE I HEREBY CERTIFY that, on this 29th day of June 2020, Plaintiffs’ Response (with attached Proposed Order) was served via the Court’s CM/ECF system on all counsel of record in accordance with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the Local Rules of the United States District Court for the District of Maryland.
/s/ Kali Bracey Kali Bracey (Bar No. 20752)

Case 1:20-cv-01838-CCB Document 38-1 Filed 06/29/20 Page 1 of 1

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF MARYLAND

DEFY VENTURES, INC., et al., Plaintiffs,
v. U.S. SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION, et al.,
Defendants.

CASE NO.: 20-cv-1838

[PROPOSED] ORDER Upon consideration of Plaintiffs’ Motion for Preliminary Injunction, and upon consideration of the record herein, it is, by this Court, on this ___ day of _________, 2020, ORDERED that said Motion is GRANTED in PART and DENIED in PART; and it is further ORDERED that the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) application and approval deadline shall hereby be extended 21 days, to July 21, 2020, for applicants ineligible under Defendants’ now withdrawn criminal-record exclusions of the June 12 Interim Final Rule. To afford Plaintiffs complete relief, the PPP deadline shall be stayed and extended only in the states in which the Individual Plaintiffs are located or where Plaintiff Defy Ventures has chapters and affiliates: Maryland, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Illinois, New York, and Washington.

_______________________ Judge Catherine C. Blake United States District Judge

