Case 1:18-cv-02593-CMA-STV Document 22 Filed 12/21/18 USDC Colorado Page 1 of 2
IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLORADO
Civil Action No. 18-cv-02593-CMA-STV MICKEY HOWARD,
Plaintiff, v.
CITY AND COUNTY OF DENVER,
Defendant.
NOTICE OF ACCEPTANCE WITH OFFER OF JUDGMENT
Pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 68(a), Plaintiff Mickey Howard serves written notice that he accepts the City and County of Denver’s attached Offer of Judgment. Respectfully submitted, /s/ Rebecca Wallace ________________________________ Rebecca Wallace Mark Silverstein ACLU Foundation of Colorado 303 E. Seventeenth Ave., Suite 350 Denver, Colorado 80203 Phone: (720) 402-3104 Facsimile: (303) 777-1773 Email: msilverstein@aclu-co.org Email: rtwallace@aclu-co.org Attorneys for Plaintiff ACLU Foundation of Colorado Dated: December 21, 2018

Case 1:18-cv-02593-CMA-STV Document 22 Filed 12/21/18 USDC Colorado Page 2 of 2
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE I hereby certify that on this 21th day of December, 2018, a true and correct copy of NOTICE OF ACCEPTANCE WITH OFFER OF JUDGMENT was filed with the Clerk of the Court via the CM/ECF system, which will send notification of such filing to the following:
Lauren Schmidt lauren.schmidt@denvergov.org Denver City Attorney’s Office Michele Horn michele.horn@denvergov.org Denver City Attorney’s Office David Maxted dmaxted@hmflaw.com Haddon, Morgan and Foreman, P.C.
/s/ Jessica Howard ________________
Jessica Howard Paralegal

Case 1:18-cv-02593-CMA-STV Document 22-1 Filed 12/21/18 USDC Colorado Page 1 of 3
IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLORADO
Civil Action No. 18-cv-02593-CMA-STV MICKEY HOWARD,
Plaintiff, v. CITY AND COUNTY OF DENVER,
Defendant.
CITY AND COUNTY OF DENVER’S OFFER OF JUDGMENT
Defendant, the City and County of Denver (“Denver”), by and through counsel, hereby tenders the following Offer of Judgment to Plaintiff, Mickey Howard, pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 68:
1. Judgment may be entered against Denver in favor of Plaintiff in the total amount of $30,000, which amount includes all reasonable recoverable costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees.
2. If timely accepted, this Offer of Judgment shall operate as a full adjudication and resolution of all claims against Denver, including any claims for attorneys’ fees or costs.
3. This Offer of Judgment shall remain open for acceptance for fourteen days in accordance with the provisions of Fed. R. Civ. P. 68.

Case 1:18-cv-02593-CMA-STV Document 22-1 Filed 12/21/18 USDC Colorado Page 2 of 3
DATED this 13th day of December, 2018. Respectfully submitted, By: s/ Lauren Schmidt Lauren Schmidt, Esq. Michele Horn, Esq. Assistant City Attorneys Denver City Attorney’s Office Civil Litigation Section 201 West Colfax Ave., Dept. 1108 Denver, Colorado 80202. Telephone: (720) 913-3100 Facsimile: (720) 913-3190 E-mail: lauren.schmidt@denvergov.org E-mail: michele.horn@denvergov.org Attorneys for Defendant City and County of Denver
2

Case 1:18-cv-02593-CMA-STV Document 22-1 Filed 12/21/18 USDC Colorado Page 3 of 3
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE I hereby certify that on this 13th day of December, 2018, a true and correct copy of CITY AND COUNTY OF DENVER’S OFFER OF JUDGMENT was served via electronic mail upon the following: Rebecca Wallace rtwallace@aclu-co.org Mark Silverstein msilverstein@aclu-co.org ACLU Foundation of Colorado David Maxted Haddon, Morgan and Foreman dmaxted@hmflaw.com
s/ Lauren Schmidt Lauren Schmidt Office of the Denver City Attorney

