There have been a few studies of using deep learning techniques for image super resolution  , BIB5919460 . Especially, the SRCNN can directly learn an end-to-end mapping between the low-resolution image and high-resolution image BIB6593498 . The mapping represents a deep CNN model that consists of three operations: patch extraction and representation, non-linear mapping, reconstruction. At the beginning of detailing each operation, here we only consider a single low-resolution image, and first upscale it to the desired size using bicubic interpolation; and then denote the interpolated image as y ∈ R m×m×c ; finally, we expect to recover from y an image f (y) that is as similar as possible to the ground truth high-resolution image x ∈ R m×m×c . To keep the following description simple and understandable, we denote y a lowresolution image, and x is the high-resolution image. Firstly, it can be expressed as an operation for the patch extraction and representation: where W 1 and b 1 represent the filters and biases respectively. Specifically, W 1 corresponds to n 1 filters of support where c is the number of channels in the input low-resolution image y ∈ R m×m×c and p 1 is the spatial size of a filter. The biases b 1 ∈ R n 1 . After applying the ReLU max(0, ·) on the filter responses, then the output f 1 (y) is composed of n 1 feature maps, that is, f 1 (y) ∈ R m×m×n 1 . Secondly, for the non-linear mapping, the operation is, where W 2 contains n 2 filters of size p 2 × p 2 × n 1 and b 2 ∈ R n 2 . Without loss of generality, it is possible to add more convolutional layers to increase the non-linearity, but the cost is more training time to increase the complexity of the model. The same with previous operation, that is, f 2 (y) ∈ R m×m×n 2 . Thirdly, for the reconstruction, the final high-resolution image can be generated by the following operation, where W 3 comprise c filters of size p 3 ×p 3 ×n 2 and b 3 ∈ R c , The same with previous operation, that is, f 3 (y) ∈ R m×m×c . Although the above three operations motivate by different intuitions, and they all lead to the same form as a convolutional layer, so three operations together and form a deep CNN architecture, namely SRCNN. Further, the filtering weights and biases are to be optimized by the following loss function, where N is the number of training samples, and parameters We have F(y, ) f 3 (y). Also, using MSE ( mean squared error) as the loss function favors a higher PSNR ( peak signal-to-noise ratio), and the loss function is minimized using SGD with the standard BP algorithm BIB52961111 . Finally, it is worth pointing out that the ground truth high-resolution images {x n } can prepare as m × m × c-pixel sub-images randomly cropped from the training images. By applying sub-images means, these samples treated as small images rather than patches. Meanwhile, to synthesize the low-resolution samples {y n }, one can blur a sub-image by the Gaussian kernel, sub-sample it by the up-scaling factor, and upscale it by the same factor via bicubic interpolation. We assume that all the convolutional layers have no padding for avoiding the phenomenon of border effects.