A DCGAN firstly introduced convolutional layers to GANs architecture, which can effectively to solve instability of the learning process for the classical GAN (see in Fig.8 ) BIB11758569 . Generally, there are some architecture guidelines for the stability of DCGAN. The first is the all convolutional networks that replace deterministic spatial pooling functions (such as max pooling) with strided/fractional-strided convolutions and allowing the network to learn its spatial down-sampling or up-sampling. Concretely, pooling layers in discriminator can replace with strided convolutions, and pooling layers in the generator can replace with fractional-strided convolutions. For example, in Fig.9 , we have the following relationship for strided convolutions, output_size = input_size-kernel+2·padding stride + 1 BIB7373060 where kernel is the size of filters (here, kernel is 3 in Fig.9 ), and ' · ' denotes floor function. Obviously, we have the input x ∈ R 5×5 and the output y ∈ R 2×2 . For fractional-strided convolutions, which can view as the inverse process of strided convolutions. That is, how to implement from y to x ? We need to calculate the new stride and new padding for expanding y, and then we have the following relationship for fractionalstrided convolutions, where input (new) is the size of y. More cases can be referred to the relevant literature. The second is BN, which stabilizes learning by normalizing the input to each unit to have zero mean and unit variance. BN can helps to deal with training problems that arise due to poor initialization and maintains gradient flow in deeper models. Besides, BN can use in other layers both of the generator and the discriminator rather than the generator output layer and the discriminator input layer. The third is that remove fully connected hidden layers for deeper architectures. The fourth is that the ReLU activation can use in the generator except for the output layer which uses the Tanh function, and the Leaky_ReLU activation function, is used in the discriminator for all layers, where α is a small constant, it means that the negative axis information will not be completely lost.