Object detection is one of the critical problems to be solved for the development of a complete scene understanding system, which has been recently successfully addressed with deep CNN giving a significant breakthrough BIB2115702 , BIB206726827 . In particular, recent advances are mainly driven by the success of region proposal methods and region-based CNN (R-CNN). Furthermore, the R-CNN can train CNN end-toend to classify (SVM classifier) the proposal regions into object categories or background, in which detection accuracy depends on the performance of the region proposal module. Further, Fast R-CNN, which is the improvement version of R-CNN, using ultra-deep networks with a softmax classifier to classify the proposal regions. Generally, the selective search is one of the most popular methods for region proposal module and consumes in much running time as the detection network. Region proposal networks (RPN BIB10328909 ) is designed to predict region proposals efficiently and to improve region proposal quality. By unifying RPN with Fast R-CNN, the obtained Faster R-CNN can significantly reduce the running time of previous detection networks. Besides, In ILSVRC and COCO 2015 competitions, Faster R-CNN and RPN are the basis of several 1st-place entries in the tracks of ImageNet detection. Further, Mask R-CNN, which based on Faster R-CNN, can predict binary segmentation mask on each region of interest, was proposed to fix the pixel-to-pixel misalignment between network inputs and outputs for Faster R-CNN. Based on ResNet-101, Mask R-CNN [55] surpasses the winner of the 2016 COCO key-point competition, and achieve an average mask precision of 35.7 and running at 5 fps on the COCO test sets. As is known to all, the two-stage object detection method represented by the R-CNN series has performed well in terms of accuracy. This kind of network model conducts object detection in two steps. Firstly, all candidate object regions are selected, and then classification and regression are conducted for each candidate region. However, the main disadvantage of those two-stage methods is its slow detection speed. Different from the idea of two-stage target detection, the onestage method is to divide the region directly on the original image and carry out classification and regression prediction. However, the main disadvantage of the one-stage method is that the positive and negative samples of the bounding box (bbox) are extremely unbalanced, resulting in poor accuracy. To effectively control the ratio of positive and negative samples and prevent the occurrence of imbalance, researchers proposed a new classification loss function Focal loss based on the cross-entropy loss function. To further verify the validity of Focal loss, researchers further designed RetinaNet BIB47252984 . RetinaNet is a single, unified network composed of a backbone network and two task-specific subnetworks, The backbone is responsible for computing a convolutional feature map over an entire input image and is an off-the-self convolutional network. The first subnet performs convolutional object classification on the backbone's output; the second subnet performs convolutional bounding box regression. The structure of the RetinaNet network is very concise. Note that the original intention of researchers is not to innovate the network structure, but to verify the effectiveness of Focal Loss. Experimental results show that RetinaNet can achieve an excellent balance in recognition accuracy and speed. In TABLE 5, We summarize some benchmark datasets and corresponding deep learning methods commonly used in object detection. Compared with the classical models, these new models are also intended to highlight novel framework/architecture design and relatively excellent generalization performance. In addition to the target detection methods described above, the H-ELM-based fast detection algorithm consists of two parts BIB206757279 ; one is that a sliding window is used to extract a fixed-size image patch, the other is to design classifier based on H-ELM. It is worth pointing out that this framework can achieve excellent performance on some simple object detection datasets without any additional samples preprocessing. For practical and complex computer vision applications, the ELM series still need to explore the functions of robust feature extraction and classifier.