In general, when the amount of training images with labels is not large enough, the deep networks can effectively avoid over-fitting phenomena using the following standard four methods BIB10048432 . • The first is data augmentation; we can manually increase the size of the training images; that is, one can produce a batch of new image sets from the available small training images by shift, rotation, noise addition, flipping, color jittering, and random crop. • The second is regularization; over-fitting can be suppressed by adding a regularization term after the loss function. However, the disadvantage is the introduction of a hyper-parameter that requires manual adjustment. • The third is a dropout; in essence, this is also a regularization method, which can be achieved by randomly zeroing the output of some neurons in a hidden layer. • The fourth is adopt the unsupervised layer-wise pretraining and fine-tuning; that is, layer-wise unsupervised pre-training can achieve by using AE or RBM, then adding classification layer to perform supervised endto-end fine tuning BIB3451188 , BIB5017487 . Apart from the above four commonly used methods, more optimization designs framework for deep learning have also been proposed and applied to few-shot learning. Below, we introduce some of the most representative network frameworks. • The first is the deep generative model, which is a powerful way of learning any data distribution function using unsupervised learning, which can generate a new image with some variations. Two of the most commonly used and efficient approaches are VAE and GAN. Notably, these two approaches have achieved tremendous success in just a few years. However, an open problem is still worth exploring is how to generate more detailed and high-quality images under the premise of guaranteeing network convergence. • The second is a recursive cortical network (RCN) BIB4468961 , which is a probabilistic and-or graph model in essence. RCN can acquire the learning ability on small samples by hierarchical and production modeling. Concretely, through the separation modeling of the edges and planes of objects and the hierarchical modeling of complex changes such as textures and scales, the whole model has a strong ability of generalization and robustness to changes in appearance. Naturally, the combination of probabilistic and graph models and deep networks may be a promising research direction. • The third is transfer learning, which focuses on storing knowledge gained while solving one problem and applying it to a different but related problem BIB17216004 ,  . For example, we have a classification task in one domain of interest, but sufficient training image sets in another domain. If transfer learning can be trained successfully, then significantly improve the performance of learning by avoiding many expensive samples. Generally, transfer learning works in two similar domains, and the performance is excellent. However, the standard of measuring the difference between the two domains has not improved. Nevertheless, this does not seem to affect its combination with deep learning may become the next research hotspot. • The fourth is bayesian CNN BIB2682206 , which placing a probability distribution over the CNN's kernels, can offer better robustness to over-fitting on small sample learning.