Single image super-resolution (SR) aims to reconstruct a high-resolution (HR) image from one single low resolution (LR) input image. As the pioneer CNN model for SR, SRCNN predicts the non-linear LR-to-HR mapping function via a FCN and significantly outperforms classical non-deep learning methods BIB6593498 . However, one fundamental problem remains unsolved mainly: how does one recover the finer texture details when super-resolution at large up-scaling factors? In recent years, GANs can provide a robust framework for generating plausible-looking natural images with high perceptual quality. Naturally, SRGAN BIB211227 (see in Fig.27 ), which is a GAN-based network optimized for a new perceptual loss, can recover photo-realistic textures from heavily down-sampled images of public benchmarks. Further, a discriminator network D which can optimize in an alternating manner along with G to solve the following adversarial minmax problem: Generally, it allows training a generative model G to fool a differentiable discriminator D that is trained to distinguish SR (or generated) images from real images. Without loss of generality, for training samples I HR n with corresponding I LR n , n = 1, 2, · · · , N . θ G can be solved by the following  where loss SR is perceptual loss function, it can be divided into content loss and adversarial loss. Moreover, the generator model is the core of SRGAN, which illustrated in Fig.27 are residual blocks with an identical layout. Finally, extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations on benchmark datasets show that SRGAN can recover the finer texture details when super-resolution at large up-scaling factors. Besides, based on the idea of CGAN, LAPGAN can generates high-quality pictures based on GAN to solve the problem of poor quality of data generated by GAN BIB1282515 . The framework of LAPGAN is illustrated in Fig.28 . Starting with a 64 × 64 input image I from training set, we take I = I 0 and blur and downsample it by a factor of two to produce I 1 , then we can up sample I 1 by a factor of two, giving a low-pass version l 0 of I 0 . Further, we compute high-pass h 0 = I 0 l 0 , h 0 is input to the discriminative model D 0 that computes the probability of it being real vs generated. The same procedure is repeated at scales 1 and 2, using I 1 and I 2 . At level 3, I 3 is an 8 × 8 image, simple enough to be modeled directly with a standard GANs G 3 and D 3 . Note that the models at each level can be trained separately. Moreover, the most significant difference between the PGGAN BIB3568073 and SRGAN and LAPGAN are that the structure of the latter two is fixed, but the structure of PGGAN is continuously changing as the training progresses. The most significant benefit of this is that most of the iterations of PGGAN are completed at a lower resolution, and the training speed is 2-6 times higher than that of traditional GANs. The main advantage of PGGAN is that it can generate high-quality samples. There are many HD pictures in our daily life, the application value of PGGAN is quite a significant promising.