Image denoising can be described as the problem of mapping from a noisy image to a noise-free image. The best currently available denoising methods approximate this mapping with cleverly deep learning algorithms. Deep learning technologies can be chosen for image denoising based on the following three reasons. First, deep network architecture can learn more extractions. Second, BN and ReLU can accelerate the training speed of deep networks. Third, deep learning models can train more samples and improve efficiency employing GPU BIB52965917 . DnCNNs can use BN and ResNet to perform image denoising BIB996788 . This framework not only deals with blind image denoising, but also addresses image super-resolution task, and JPEG image deblocking. Fig.31 illustrates the architecture of the DnCNN. The input of our DnCNN is a noisy observation of y = x + z, where z is additive noise, and x is a clean image. One can adopt the residual learning formulation to train a residual mapping R(y) ≈ z, and then we have a clean image of x = y − R(y). For N noisy-clean training image (patch) pairs (x i , y i ) N i=1 , then we have the following optimization object function, where θ denotes the trainable parameters in DnCNNs, experiments demonstrate that DnCNN can exhibit high effectiveness in several general image denoising tasks. Many other typical methods also obtain excellent performance for image denoising. For example, the fusion of the dilated convolution and ResNet is used for image denoising, and this framework is fit for combing disparate sources of experts of image denoising BIB21698037 . FFDNet can uses noise level map and noisy image as an input to deal with different noise levels BIB10514149 . IRCNN can fuses the model-based optimization method and CNN to perform image denoising, which can deal with different inverse problems and multiple tasks with one single-mode BIB2141622 .