Although deep learning has achieved excellent performance in some image processing applications, it still needs considerable effort to tackle the openness mentioned above problems. In particular, it would be precious to develop a safe and efficient deep learning-based image processing system. In the process of image processing and analysis, security issues related to deep learning seem to have rarely mentioned. The security problem here refers to the degradation of generalization performance caused by the vulnerability of the model to several malicious attacks BIB3305327 . Of course, there are many kinds of malicious attacks, such as forging data sets that are not consistent with the image representation, tampering with the statistical characteristics of some hidden layer parameters, abusing the evaluation index of the model, and so on. It is worth pointing out that the security problem of deep learning is not unrelated to the black box characteristics of this model. Once someone attacked the deep learning system, the possibility of this system repair will decrease  . We expect that security issues will become an essential ingredient and future trend for designing a deep learning system in image processing  . For complex image processing tasks, simple models do not seem to be effective, and useful models are often not simple. Effective models here means that the model can obtain relatively excellent generalization performance, and simple models imply that the capacity of the model is relatively low. For example, ResNet can quickly get more than 90% or even higher test accuracy in CIFAR 10/100 classification task but deep stacked auto-encoder network can only hover around 60% BIB6447277 . It is generally accepted that the ResNet has a more extensive model capacity than the deep stacked auto-encoder network. Here, the concept of model capacity involves the number of parameters of the model, the topological structure of the model, and the complexity of the model. Note that model complexity is not the only factor that can determine the performance difference between the two deep learning models. It should also include parameter optimization learning mode, training skills, and parameter initialization. However, the quantification of model capacity is still a potential research direction in the future. Then the research result will help us to summarize the models related to deep learning in specific image processing tasks. Further, similar to the wavelet base library, the deep learning library can help us to make an appropriate model selection. Since it is usually expensive to obtain sufficient annotated data in several image processing tasks, unsupervised deep learning have been considered as promising research directions at all time. The recent breakthroughs in unsupervised deep learning like the GAN series can provide a gateway to harness the massive amount of unlabelled image datasets. In more image compression processing tasks, there is a higher requirement for the reversibility of the system, which is different from the deep learning model, including GAN. Therefore, the development of the reversible deep learning model is still a potential research direction in the field of unsupervised learning in the future.