With the disappearance of data dividends, deep learning has increasingly demonstrated its limitations, particularly in relying on large-scale image datasets with labels and the inability to use prior knowledge effectively, et., these limitations hinder the further development of deep learning BIB20381654 . How to effectively apply a large amount of prior knowledge/rules? How to make the result of the deep learning model consistent with prior knowledge BIB37959765 ? Based on the prior knowledge or rules is what bridges the gap between large neural networks and relatively small datasets, these problems have gradually become one of the mainstream research directions. Actually, there are many ways to incorporate prior knowledge into deep neural networks BIB19844212 , BIB4300209 . The simplest type of prior knowledge often used is weight decay, which assumes the weights come from a normal distribution with zero mean and some fixed variance. Then this type of prior knowledge is added as an additional term to the loss function. Especially, weight decay can view as the same as the Bayesian approach to modeling prior knowledge. Similar to weight decay, it is possible to construct other loss terms that penalize mappings contradicting our domain knowledge. However, integrating prior knowledge into deep learning is not always easy, the main reason is that the main description of knowledge representation is not an abstract quantitative feature, but a relationship between features BIB18468934 . Also, deep learning places too much emphasis on the independence of the system and exclude general prior knowledge. Therefore, deep learning combined with prior knowledge/rules of the image may become a breakthrough in solving small sample problems, but this promising direction still needs further research.