FCN, a novel deep CNN architecture proposed recently, has achieved excellent performance on pixel levels recognition tasks, such as object segmentation and edge detection BIB1629541 . Typical recognition nets, including LeNet, AlexNet, ostensibly take fixed-sized inputs and produce non-spatial outputs. Undoubtedly the fully connected layers of these nets have fixed dimensions and throw away spatial coordinates. Positively, these fully connected layers can also regard as convolutions with kernels. It is assuming that each layer of data onto a CNN architecture is a three-dimensional array H × W × P, that is, spatial dimensions H × W (height and width) and feature or channel dimension P. First, how to convert a fully connected layer to a convolutional layer? For examples, from H × W × P l to 1 × 1 × P l+1 , where P l denotes the number of channel dimension of l-th block or ConvNet layer. Actually, we need P l+1 filters of size H × W × P l . Second, How to realize upsampling? The method used is backward strided convolution (sometimes called deconvolution), which can connect coarse outputs to dense pixels via interpolation. For instance, simple bilinear interpolation computes each output from the nearest four inputs by a linear map that depends only on the relative positions of the input and output cells. Thus up-sampling is performed in-network for end-to-end learning by BP from the pixel-wise loss. Note that the deconvolution filter in such a layer need not fix (e.g., bilinear up-sampling), but one can learn it. For examples, in Fig.5 , one can learn deconvolution filter from Here the number of channel dimensions is neglected, then we can obtain the size of filters is In other words, the output size after deconvolution is 32 times the input feature map, which we now call FCN-32s in Fig.6 . similarly, one can learn to combine high layer information with low layer information, such as FCN-16s in Fig.6 .