Deep learning thrives with large neural networks and large datasets. One key ingredient for success of deep learning in image classification is the use of convolutional architectures  - BIB17626160 . For example, deep CNNs has shown state-of-art classification performance on datasets such as ImageNet, a large visual database designed for use in visual object recognition software research. In addition, a dramatic 2012 breakthrough in solving the imageNet challenge BIB195908774 is widely considered to be the beginning of the deep learning revolution (see in Fig.24 ). From then on, many innovative deep frameworks based on CNNs was proposed for imagenet classification tasks, such as AlexNet, GoogleNet, VGG, and ResNet, etc. In other words, ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge (ILSVRC) greatly promotes the development of deep CNNs. Meanwhile, scientific researchers have put forward various training techniques one after another. For example, to reduce over-fitting in the globally connected layers, a new regularization method dropout that proved to be very useful. Furthermore, BN is a very effective regularization method that can accelerate the training of large conglomerate networks many times. Further, the obtained higher accuracy can implement by updating the residual module to use identity mappings, and so on. ELM has demonstrated better generalization performance with extreme fast learning speed in many benchmarks and real applications. Compared with the performance of support vector machine (SVM), the classification performance of ELM shows that ELM has better generalization performance with much less training time on majority cases than SVM for both feature extraction methods. Furthermore, the improvement algorithms, which based on ELM-RVFL, have a significant improvement in classification accuracy rate. For examples, the improvement algorithm H-ELM and BLS not only achieves state-of-art results but also shortens the training time from days (spent by deep learning) to several minutes (by ELM) in MNIST OCR dataset, traffic sign recognition and 3D graphics application, Norb, Fashion MNIST, SVHN, etc. However, on some complex datasets (such as CIFAR 10/100 and ImageNet datasets), ELM series algorithms still need further improvement and combined with the prior of an image to achieve excellent generalization performance, there is still a long way to go. Though deep neural networks are robust, they have some apparent deficiencies. One is that a massive amount of training data usually required for training deep neural networks, which can disable few-shot learning. The other is that deep neural networks are very complicated models and powerful computational facilities traditionally needed for the training process. More importantly, deep neural networks are with too many hyperparameters, and the learning performance depends seriously on the careful tuning of them BIB23450275 . For small-scale datasets, the GAN series can generate more different style samples to promote the generalization performance of the deep discriminative model for classification tasks. At the same time, it also provides a practical solution to the small sample problem. For the enormous hyperparameters, deep forest, which is a novel decision tree ensemble method, can achieve better classification performance by much fewer hyperparameters. However, the deep forest still needs further improvement on more complex datasets. In short, facing a variety of classification applications, a specific deep method is not omnipotent for classification tasks. Two ways motivate the continuous development of deep learning, one is application tasks, and data characteristics, more training tricks (including BN, dropout, early stopping, momentum, and so on) and suitable deep models, such as CV-CNN, and the other is the enhancement of model expressive ability that is independent of data, such as CapsuleNet. In TABLE 4, We summarize some benchmark datasets and corresponding deep learning methods commonly used in image classification. Compared with the classical models, these new generation models are intended to highlight novel framework/architecture design and relatively excellent generalization performance.