To breakthrough of scalar input and scalar output restrictions for traditional neurons, an innovative capsule unit was proposed that can output an activity vector represents the instantiation parameters of a specific type of entity such as an object or an object part, which can regard as vector version of neurons. Naturally, each layer of the CapsuleNet BIB3603485 is made up of some capsules; its main advantage is to make full use of spatial relations of data. To keep a clear understanding of the CapsuleNet architecture, a simple CapsuleNet architecture which based on traditional CNN shows in Fig.21 , and this architecture is relatively shallow with only two convolutional layers and one fully-connected layer. Assume the input x ∈ R 28×28 , and the label y ∈ R 10 . Conv1 has 256 convolution kernels ( 9 × 9) with a stride of 1 and ReLU activation. Therefore, the output of conv1 can express as, where W BIB64507634 i ∈ R 9×9 denotes i-th convolution kernels of first hidden layer and i = 1, 2, · · · , 256. Further, the second layer (or Primary Capsules) is a convolutional capsule layer with 4 primary capsules, and each primary capsule contains eight convolutional units with a 9 × 9 kernel and a stride of 2, that is, where W BIB17776695 j,s,k ∈ R 9×9 , and subscript k denotes convolution kernels, s means convolutional units and j represents primary capsules. In addition, s = 1, 2, · · · , 8 and j = 1, 2, 3, 4. For simplicity, then the output of the second layer can be rewritten as, h BIB17776695 ∈ R 4×6×6×8 Meanwhile, primary capsules of the second layer can be viewed as 4 × 6 × 6 capsules, and each capsule is an 8-dimension vector. Without loss of generality, for each capsule, we have, where s = j × u × v, and u, v = 1, 2, · · · , 6. Notably, no routing is used between Conv1 and primary capsules. Further, considering the number of categories is 10 for MNIST, so the number of digit capsules is 10. Concretely, where Squash(·) is a non-linear function to ensure that short vectors get shrunk to almost zero length and long vectors get shrunk to a length slightly below 1, and r means the r-th category, r = 1, 2, · · · , 10. Specially, weight matrix W (3) r,s ∈ R 16×8 , and the parameter C r,s ∈ R is coupling coefficient that are determined by the iterative dynamic routing process. To allow for multiple digits, we use a separate margin loss, where T r = 1 iff a digit of class k is present, and the parameter m + = 0.9, m − = 0.1. Finally, for the input x, the total loss is simply the sum of the losses of all digit capsules, that is, During the training phase, for all input samples {x n } N n=1 , then we can solve the correspond parameter by the optimization loss function n L(x n ). For the testing phase, we can takeŷ(r) equals L r (x), then the final predictionŷ = [ŷ(1), · · · ,ŷ(10)]. Undoubtedly, a simple capsules system already gives unparalleled performance at segmenting overlapping digits is an early indication that CapsuleNet are a direction worth exploring.