To fully explore the rich information embedded in complexvalued (CV) images, CV-CNN has to be developed BIB21476699 , BIB11221959 , BIB542039 . The architecture of a CV-CNN can regard VOLUME 7, 2019 as a variant of the deep neural networks, which not only takes complex data as input but also propagates the phase information through all layers. For CV-CNN, all the layers of the networks, including the convolutional layer, pooling layer, fully connected layer, should be fully CV. The details of each layer in its CV version are presented in the following. Firstly, for the convlutional layer, the complex output feature maps O (l) k are computed by the convolution between all the previous layers input feature maps O (l−1) ∈ C n×m and a set of filters { (l) k ∈ C v×v , k = 1, 2, · · · , K }, and then add a bias {γ (l) k ∈ C, k = 1, 2, · · · , K }. where 'C' denotes the complex domain and the superscript is its dimension. where σ (·) is an element-wise non-linear function, and ∀z ∈ C. We have where z = R(z) + jI(z). And this CV-convolution operation can be calculated by Secondly, for the pooling layer, In other words, pooling layers can regard as sub-sampling layers, and pooling helps to make the representation invariant to small shifts and distortions of the input. Finally, after several CV convolutional and CV pooling layers, CV fully-connected layers are usually added to act as classification layers. The expected outputỹ and predictive output t can be written as, where f is the non-linear function, and real-valued vector y ∈ R c is the label of input sample, and CV vector v can be obtained by flattening the CV matrix V (l) . If the softmax is applied to CV-CNN, the result is not a probability due to its CV input. Therefore, the final output is the classifier, and the least-squares loss function is adopted in CV-CNN. Experiments show that the classification error can further reduce if employing CV-CNN instead of conventional realvalued CNN with the same degrees of freedom BIB11221959 ,  .