In recent years, researchers have published many reviews/ surveys papers related to deep learning technology in the field of image processing, such as the works in the fields of microscopic image analysis BIB51612859 , hyperspectral image analysis BIB17399198 and medical image analysis BIB6736412 etc. Besides, the work of Tian et al. summarize the related processing ideas of deep learning in specific image denoising tasks BIB52965917 . Deng et al. summarize the deep stacked model under the semi-supervised learning paradigm from the design and application points of view BIB9928823 . These works have positive enlightenment for the improvement of existing methods and model selection of specific application background. However, the types of deep models mentioned in these works are not abundant, none of them can provide a mathematical principle of the models, and they lack some of the most recent deep learning models. Compared with the above reviews/surveys, an initial motivation of this survey is trying to summarize the application of these new-generation deep learning algorithms and frameworks in image processing and to evaluate the effectiveness of these new generations of deep network framework and acquire more inspiration for deep network's design and optimization tricks BIB206907269 . In particular, the summary of the new generation of deep learning models will follow along the four main lines, 1) Deep CNN and its improved deep network structure  , the classic framework include CV-CNN, SRCNN, Mask R-CNN, FCN, U-Net, DenseNet, FractalNet, etc. 2) GAN  and its improved deep network structure, the classic framework includes DCGAN, PTGAN, InfoGAN, LAPGAN, TAC-GAN, SegAN, CoGAN etc. 3) ELM BIB116858 or RVFL BIB1713804 (denote as ELM-RVFL) and its improved deep network structure, the classic framework includes C-ELM, H-ELM, BLS, F-BLS, etc. 4) Other typical new generation deep network structure includes Deep Forest, ADMM-Net, CapsuleNet, ML-CSC BIB20496896 , VAE, PCANet, DDL, etc. More concretely, these can be summarized as TABLE 2  and TABLE 3 . In this survey, our main intention is to focus on a new generation of deep learning models and their mathematical principles. It is worth pointing out that we have three criterions for choosing several representative models. One is that this network has a novel topological structure. Second, excellent generalization performance can achieve in specific image application tasks. Third, the research results generally accepted by scientific researchers, and there are further development and improvement for a deep model. Most of the other deep learning models can be variants of these four deep architectures' main lines. In the following parts, we review the four typical deep learning series models in detail. Also, we will mainly describe the generalization performance of the corresponding new generation of deep learning algorithm from the perspective of the application task, which covers various topics, such as image classification, style transfer, object recognition, super-resolution, image compression, image segmentation, change detection, image denoising. Specifically, the framework structure flow diagram of this survey shown in Fig.2 .