TAC-GAN is a text-to-image GAN framework for synthesizing images from their text descriptions BIB8448539 . TAC-GAN builds upon the conditional auxiliary classifier GANs by conditioning the generated images on a text description instead of on a class label. For the presented TAC-GAN model, the input vector of the Generative network is built based on a noise vector and another vector containing an embedded representation of the textual description. While the Discriminator is similar to that of the TAC-GAN, it is also augmented to receive the text information as input before performing its classification. SegAN mainly designs for the task of medical image segmentation, which includes two parts: segmentor network and critic network BIB13688414 . Unlike classical GAN architecture, they use an FCN as the segmentor to generate segmentation label maps and propose a novel adversarial critic network with a multi-scale L 1 loss function to force the critic and segmentor to learn both global and local features that capture long-and short-range spatial relationships between pixels. Finally, the segmentor and critic networks can be trained in an alternating fashion in a min-max game. CoGAN is an improvement framework based on the GAN framework, which has established as a viable solution to image distribution learning tasks BIB3859426 . Moreover, CoGAN can extend GAN for joint image distribution learning tasks. Precisely, CoGAN consists of a tuple of GAN, each for one image domain. The CoGAN learns a product of marginal distributions rather than a joint distribution.