In recent years, CNN has also made great success in image processing and object recognition. The strength of CNN lies in their shared weights. Weight sharing dramatically reduces the number of free parameters learned, thus to lower the memory requirements for running the network and allowing the training of more extensive, more powerful networks BIB12881926 . A CNN consists of convolutional layers, pooling layers, normalization layers, and fully connected layers. At each layer, the input image X ∈ R n×m is convolved with a set of K kernels {W k ∈ R v×v , k = 1, 2, · · · , K } and subsequently biases {b k ∈ R, k = 1, 2, · · · , K } are added, each generating a new feature map X k by an element-wise non-linear transform σ (·). The same process is repeated for convolutional layer l, where symbol '⊗' denotes the discrete convolution operator, and its specific type of operation has a variety of forms, such as 'valid' convolution, 'same' convolution, 'extra' convolution, strided convolution, fractional-strided convolution, etc. Another essential layer of CNN is pooling, which is a form of non-linear down-sampling. Convolutional layers are typically alternated with pooling layers where pixel values of neighborhoods are aggregated using some permutation invariant function, usually the max or average operations, which provides another form of translation invariance BIB3388071 - BIB17351470 . Finally, after several convolutional and max-pooling layers, the high-level reasoning in the neural network is done via fully connected layers, where weights are no longer shared. CNN is typically trained end-to-end in an entirely supervised manner. The significant reduction in the number of weights parameters and the translational invariance of the learned features contributes to the ability of CNN to be trained end-to-end.