Classification of imbalanced data sets is a significant research problem as many real-world image sets have skewed class distributions in which most images belong to a few majority classes, and the minority classes contain a limited amount of other image sets  . Many approaches have been proposed for tackling this issue, and these approaches can be roughly divided into two categories, • The first is data manipulation techniques that target changing the data distribution to make data sets less imbalanced. For example, the most common approach is the sampling, which can operate on the data itself to increase its balance. However, over-sampling can quickly introduce undesirable noise with over-fitting risks, and under-sampling is often preferred to remove valuable information  . • The second is algorithm/model-oriented approaches, which aim to develop new learning mechanisms to work for imbalanced images datasets. For example, costsensitive learning, which can assign higher misclassification costs to the minority class than to the majority. More common class imbalanced methods in machine learning can refer to literature BIB18110953 , BIB32093723 . Although deep learning has reached great success in many research topics, as mentioned earlier, very few approaches have been made to target it for imbalanced image data. Undoubtedly, applying deep learning directly on imbalanced images datasets may result in poor performance. Below, we introduce four approaches that may help improve the performance of deep learning in class imbalance. • The first is a deep generative model, which can generate more new images with some variations from the minority classes. For example, HexaGAN, a generative adversarial network framework that shows promising classification performance for class imbalance problem BIB67855874 . However, the convergence of deep generative models based on minority class image datasets becomes an insurmountable challenge. • The second is the deep forest, which can give full play to the superiority of its basic unit decision tree in class imbalance. For example, class weights random forest can be assigned individual weights for each class instead of a single weight BIB3491020 . The validation test on UCI data sets demonstrates that for imbalanced medical data, class weights random forest enhanced the overall performance of the classifier while producing high accuracy in identifying both majority and minority class. • The third is to combine deep CNN with bootstrapping strategy, and during the bootstrapping process, a set of pseudo balanced training batches are generated based on the properties of the data set and fed into the deep CNN for classification BIB3074115 . • The fourth is active learning, which is a more efficient alternative to resampling methods to form a balanced training image datasets. Naturally, a model that combines deep learning with active learning can be one of the most promising direction for class imbalance BIB28920310 , BIB14418026 .