Nowadays, deep learning has dramatically promoted the research progress of image processing. Correspondingly, various applications related to image processing are also helping the rapid development of deep learning in all aspects of network structure, layer design, and training tricks. Therefore, the development of deep learning in image processing is in the ascendant, and there is still a vast space for the future of AI. However, the deeper structure makes BP algorithm more difficult. At the same time, the scale of training images without labels is also rapidly increasing; this urgently requires more new deep models and a new parallel computing system to more effectively interprets the content of the image and form a suitable analysis mechanism. In this context, we have summarized a new generation of deep learning methods used in image processing, but also presents the dedicated discussion on open challenges, unsolved problems, and potential future trends. There are a large number of new developing deep learning techniques and emerging deep models each year, here, we provide a comprehensive framework for comprehensive understanding towards the critical aspects of this field, clarify the most important advancements and shed some light on future studies. More importantly, this survey aims to help or arouse other researchers to catch a glimpse of the state-of-the-art deep learning methods in the field of image processing and facilitate the applications of these deep learning technologies in their research tasks. By further studying the relationship between deep learning and image processing applications, it can not only help us understand the reasons for the success of deep learning but also inspire new deep models and training methods. We also hope that our theoretical understanding of the properties of deep learning will continuously improve in the nick of time, as it currently lags far behind the practice.