The GANs framework (see in Fig.7 ) includes a generative model that captures the sample distribution and a discriminative model that estimates the probability that a sample came from the training (real) sample rather than generating (fake) sample  , BIB10466029 . Based on game theory, one can training GANs requires finding a Nash equilibrium of a non-convex game with continuous, high-dimensional parameters. Generally, training GANs is a problematic issue in practice because of the instability of GANs learning. Several welldesigned networks have proposed to overcoming the problem of instability. In Fig.7 , We can use differentiable functions D and G to represent the discriminator and the generator, and their inputs are real sample x and random variables z, respectively. The purpose of D is to achieve the correct classification of sample source, while the purpose of G is to make the performance of generated sample G(z) consistent with the performance of the real sample. Therefore, the optimization of GAN can formulate as the following minimax problem: The adversarial optimization process improves the performance of D and G gradually. Eventually, when the discrimination ability of D has been improved to an excellent level but cannot discriminate against the sample source correctly, it is thought that the generator G has captured the distribution of a real sample. Since Ian J Goodfellow proposed GAN in 2014, many GAN variants have produced so far. Undoubtedly, GANs have solved many problems in generative models and inspired other artifical intelligence (AI) methods, but there are still some limitations BIB3646966 . For example, from a mathematical point of view, GANs adopt the adversarial learning idea, but the convergence of the model and existence of the equilibrium point have not been proved yet. Besides, the same as generative models based on neural networks, GANs have the common disadvantages of neural networks, such as poor interpretability. Furthermore, although the samples generated by GANs are very different in style, there exists the mode collapse problem (that is, GANs cannot generate continuously changing samples with the change of input noise z). Scientific researchers have put forward many research directions to focus on better solving those drawbacks of GANs. From the perspective of combining GANs with other methods, how to integrate GANs with feature learning, imitation learning, and reinforcement learning to develop new AI applications and promote the development of these methods is very meaningful and hopefully. Below, we mainly introduce the performance of several classic GAN variant models in image processing.