It is well-known that the goal of GAN is to learn a generator distribution that matches the real data distribution BIB5002792 . The generator network can generate samples by transforming a noise variable of z. Besides, the noise z can be used by the generator in a highly entangled way, causing the individual dimensions of z to not corresponding to semantic features of the data. In other words, z is not an interpretable expression variable. Furthermore, this is precisely the motivation of Info-GAN to find an interpretable expression, which decomposes the input noise vector into two parts: (1) z, which is treated as source of incompressible noise; (2) c, which call the latent code and target the salient structured semantic features of the data distribution. It is important to identify these latent factors without supervision. Based on information-theoretic regularization, if latent code c is interpretable for generating data G(z, c) (here G(·) is the generative model), then there should be high mutual information. In information theory, mutual information between c and G(z, c), namely I (c, G(z, c)), can be used to measures the amount of information learned from knowledge of variable c about the other variable G(z, c). Further, it can be expressed as the difference between two entropy terms, where H (t) denotes entropy of t. Obviously, I (c, G(z, c)) is the reduction of uncertainty in c when G(z, c) is observed. For original GAN, the minimax game is given by the following expression: where D(·) is the discriminative model, and P data and P noise is the real data distribution and noise distribution, respectively. For InfoGAN, we have the following information-regularized minimax optimization object: where λ is the Lagrange multiplier. In practice, I (c, G(z, c)) is hard to maximize directly as it requires access to the posterior P(c|x). Fortunately we can obtain a lower bound of it by defining an auxiliary distribution Q(c|x) to approximate P(c|x): where KL(·) can measure the difference between two probability distributions. We can define a variational lower bound, Hence, InfoGAN is defined as the following minimax game, Finally, if c is categorical latent code, then Q(c|x) can be represented using the non-linear transmission of softmax; if c is continuous latent code, it can be represented by the Gaussian distribution.