U-Net is an improvement based on FCN architecture. Its network architecture consists of two parts: contraction path and extension path BIB3719281 . The shrinking path is mainly used to capture the context information about the picture, while the expanding path used to precisely locate the parts that need to the segment of the picture. Compared with FCN, the highpixel feature extracted by U-Net in contraction path will be combined with the new feature map in the up-sampling process to maximize the retention of some important feature information in the previous down-sampling process. Besides, there is no full connected layer in the whole network, which can minimize the number of training parameters. And the U-shaped structure can better retain the information about the picture. As we all know, classical deep learning needs abundant samples and expensive computing resources; however, U-Net can be used for small sample learning. In particular, this network is suitable for medical-related image segmentation tasks. Compared with ResNet, DenseNet's innovation lies in the outputs of each layer are connected with all successor layers in a dense block, the feature maps learned by this layer are also passed directly to all the layers behind it as input  . Another highlight of DenseNet is efficient for feature reuse, which dramatically reduces network parameters. It is worth pointing out that dense connection directly connects input and loss in each layer, thus alleviating the phenomenon of gradient vanishing. Finally, This new model shows stateof-the-art accuracy with a reasonable number of network parameters for the object recognition tasks. FractalNet is an advanced and alternative architecture of the ResNet model, which is another efficient for designing large models with nominal depth BIB4524037 . Unlike ResNet, FractalNet demonstrates that path length is essential for training ultra-deep neural networks, and residual learning is not necessary for ultra-deep networks. Unlike ResNet, the performance of FractalNet trained by dropout and drop-path tricks often surpasses that of ResNet.