Nowadays, deep learning is the dominant method of more excellent solutions to many tasks in image processing. The survey is not only to provide a systematic overview of deep learning in image processing, but also presents a dedicated discussion on open challenges, unsolved problems, and potential future trends. Specifically, we introduce the contributions of deep learning to different image processing tasks and present the current effort devoted to addressing these issues by the new generation of deep learning. Furthermore, we point out several potential future research trends of deep learning in image processing. Meanwhile, we analysis the fundamental theoretical insights about the new generation deep networks in detail, it seems the pressing need for deep learning nowadays. Finally, This survey aims to improve or arouse other researchers to catch a glimpse of the state-of-the-art deep learning methods in the field of image processing and facilitate the applications of these deep learning technologies in their research tasks. It is particularly worth pointing out that, as far as many neurocognitive mechanisms are still further developed and perfected, the work of network modeling based on biological neural enlightenment is still a long way off. The rest of this survey as structured as followed. In Section II we introduce the new generation of deep learning techniques that have used for image processing and that referred to throughout the survey. Section III describes the contributions of deep learning to canonical tasks in image processing: image classification, style transfer, object VOLUME 7, 2019 detection, super-resolution, image compression, semantic segmentation, and image denoising. Section IV discusses obtained results and open issues in application areas; meanwhile, we also objectively give a critical discussion and an outlook for further research.