It is well-known that many other non-trivial visual recognition tasks have also greatly benefited from ultra-deep models. Therefore, a question arises that '' is learning better networks as easy as stacking more layers?'' With the network layer increasing, it is indisputable that an obstacle is the notorious problem of vanishing or exploding gradients, which can hamper the convergence of networks. Besides, accuracy gets saturated and then degrades rapidly. Unexpectedly, such degradation does not cause by over-fitting. Furthermore, adding more layers to a suitably deep model lead to higher training error. For the degradation problem, The classical ResNet BIB206594692 can explicitly let these stacked layers fit a residual mapping rather than a desired underlying mapping. For example, a building block in Fig.4 that has two layers, Therefore, a building block defined as: where x and y are the input and output of the layers considered. The function F(x) represents the residual mapping to be learned, that is, where σ denotes classical active function ReLU BIB12941697 . The operation F(x) + x is performed by a short-cut connection and element-wise addition. It should note that the dimensions of x and F(x) must be the same. If this is not the case, the first choice is that one can perform a linear projection W s by the short-cut connections to match the dimensions: The other choice is that one can still perform identity mapping, but with extra zero entries padded for increasing dimensions was considered. Certainly, we can also use the square matrix in Eq. BIB54602508 , and it can further make the form of residual function F(x) more flexible. In particular, if the residual function F(x) represents multiple convolutional layers, then the element-wise addition is performed on two feature maps, channel by channel. More importantly, ResNet structure is simple, which can solves the problem of deep convolution neural network performance degradation under ultra-deep conditions, and its classification performance is excellent. Finally, more tricks include BN right after each convolution and before activation, and one can do not use dropout or max-out.