Mask R-CNN is a simple, flexible, and general framework for object instance segmentation [55] . This framework consists of two stages, the first stage, called an RPN, proposes candidate object bounding boxes. The second stage, which extends Faster R-CNN BIB10328909 (see black flowchart in Fig.3 ) by adding a branch for predicting binary segmentation masks on each RoI, in parallel with the current branch for softmax classification and bounding box regression. Significantly, Faster R-CNN does not design for pixel-to-pixel alignment between network inputs and outputs. RoIAlign is a simple quantization-free layer for fixing the misalignment, which faithfully preserves exact spatial locations. Further, during the training phase, a multi-task loss on each sampled RoI can be expressed as follows, BIB10533418 where L cls and L box is classification loss and bounding-box loss, respectively. Moreover, the mask branch has a Km 2dimensional output for each RoI, which encodes K binary masks of resolution m × m, one for each of the K classes. To this, we apply a per-pixel sigmoid and define L mask as the average binary cross-entropy loss. Besides, for an RoI associated with ground-truth class k, L mask is only defined on the k-th mask. For the Mask R-CNN network architecture in Fig.3 , we can differentiate between the convolutional Backbone architecture used for feature extraction over an entire image and the network head for bounding-box recognition (softmax classification and regression) and binary mask prediction that is applied separately to each RoI. Specifically, one can using the nomenclature network-depth-features for the Backbone architecture, such as ResNet networks of depth 50 or 101 layers, and with an FPN BIB10716717 backbone extracts RoI features from different levels of the feature pyramid according to their scale. Therefore, Using a ResNet-50/ 101-FPN backbone for feature extraction captures excellent gains in both accuracy and speed. For the network head, which closely follows architectures presented in previous work to which adds a fully convolutional mask prediction branch; the head part on the ResNet-50/101-FPN that uses fewer filters is more efficient. Finally, RPN can be trained separately and does not share features of Mask R-CNN unless specified.