In addition to the above image processing tasks, we will briefly introduce some of the successful applications of deep learning technology. First, let us start with the image retrieval task. CBIR is one of the fundamental research challenges extensively studied in the multimedia community for decades. However, the semantic gap issues that exist between low-level image pixels captured by machines and high-level semantic information perceived by a human is still one of the most challenging problems in current CBIR research. Among various techniques, deep CNN has been actively investigated as a promising direction to bridge the semantic gap in the long term  . On the one hand, deep CNN can obtain useful high-level feature representations of images using large-scale network architecture. On the other hand, a deep CNN model on classification or similarity loss function can be retrained easily since the features extracted by the pre-trained deep CNN model may not be better than the traditional handcrafted features BIB207217044 . Second, for the change detection, it means two images of the same area can be captured at two different time instances, and then these two images are processed to identify the changes part, the output is a binary change map, which indicates the location of the changes. Generally, the goal of change detection is to detect significant changes while rejecting unimportant ones by preprocessing operations (i.e., geometric and radiometric adjustments). In recently, Deep learning has a powerful ability to learn abstract features. In particular, as the unsupervised deep learning methods successively proposed, such as GAN, VAE, ML-CSC, therefore researching the application of deep learning techniques to change detection has become a promising research direction  ,  . Third, for face recognition, that is a relatively mature application direction for deep learning. In particular, CNN has achieved promising results in face recognition recently. From deep hidden identity feature (deepID BIB11102127 ) to faceNet BIB206592766 , CNN plays a very important role in feature extraction. On the widely used Labelled Faces in the Wild dataset, faceNet can even achieve a new record recognition accuracy of 99.63%.