ML-CSC BIB20496896 , which consists of a cascade of convolutional sparse layers, can provides a new interpretation of CNNs. First, we give a concrete example for better understanding CSC model. assume x ∈ R 25 admits a decomposition as Dα, where α ∈ R (25·m) is sparse and the dictionary D ∈ R 25×(25·m) has a convolutional structure. Precisely, this dictionary consists of m local n-dimensional filters at every possible location, where m denotes the width of stripe for convolutional structure. For example, m = 2 and n = 5, then CSC model can be shown in Fig.22 , Further, each jth patch P j x ∈ R n (&R 5 ) from the signal x can be expressed in terms of a shift-invariant local model corresponding to a stripe from the global sparse vector, S j α ∈ R (2n−1)m (&R 18 ), where P j can be viewed as patch extraction, S j is a patch extractor in transform space. In the context of CSC, the sparsity of the representation is better captured through the l 0,∞ pseudo-norm. Formally, Given a convolutional dictionary of appropriate dimension, a signal x admits a representation in terms of the CSC model if satisfy, where K ∈ N is the sparsity degree. We can expand CSC model to ML-CSC, that is, given a set of convolutional dictionaries {D l } L l=1 of appropriate dimensions, a signal x admits a representation in terms of the ML-CSC model if satisfy, where K l is the sparsity degree, l = 1, 2, · · · , L, L is the number of layers. Interestingly, the ML-CSC can interpret as a special case of the CSC model. Finally, these sparse coefficients α l can be solved by the deep coding algorithm BIB10429836 .