One important issue that needs to be considered in most CO 2 capture methods is the high energy requirement, because energy availability is an important global issue. High energy penalty and excessive use of external utilities are another challenge confronting the capture of CO 2 from power plants  . CO 2 compression and sorbent regeneration during CO 2 capture account for about 92% of the energy penalty associated with most carbon capture and storage technologies  . For instance, a typical CO 2 capture system that is based on monoethanolamine (MEA) requires a significant amount of energy at about 3.0-4.5 GJ/t CO 2 to regenerate the solvent in the stripper reboiler as well as energy for the stripper feed which is usually provided by cooling of the lean solvent BIB112141537 . According to a report by Zenz-House et al. BIB110677245 , energy penalty associated with retrofitting CO 2 capture devices into existing power plants is estimated between 50 and 80%. A further analysis of the thermodynamic limit indicates that energy penalty during CO 2 capture can be improved by harnessing the available waste heat and improving the second-law efficiency of temperature-swing adsorption systems BIB97646012 . Zenz-House et al. BIB110677245 postulated that in real-life situation, it is difficult to attain an energy penalty reduction below 25% during post-combustion CO 2 capture. The authors also indicated that to offset the energy penalty incurred during capture and storage, about 80% CO 2 emissions will require either an additional 390-600 million tonnes of fuel, additional 69-92 gigawatts of CO 2 -free-baseload power, or a 15-20% reduction in overall electricity usage. CO 2 capture units also require power to operate the gas compressors and other auxiliary equipment. Heat energy is also rejected from the stripper and compressor during CO 2 capture and compression. Retrofitting CO 2 capture devices in existing power plants will lead to a deficit of heat in the plant which has generally been proposed to be overcome by supplying heat and extracting steam from the turbine to the stripper reboiler BIB97646012 . This subsequently reduces energy expenditure, but drops the net efficiency of the power plant by approximately 30-40%  . Developing a network for heat and mass exchange during CO 2 compression and regeneration using heat and mass integration approaches, as reviewed and proposed in this section, is a more reliable method that would ensure optimal energy and material usage with stable plant efficiency. Therefore, it forms the major focus of this review. A breakdown of the associated energy penalty in a typical CO 2 capture process is presented in Fig. 11 .