The end of the query process in Scopus for scientific contributions in this field retrieved a total of 356 peer-reviewed journal publications of interest to HENs and MENs synthesis starting from 1990 when the first contribution related to the synthesis of MENs was presented by El-Halwagi and Manousiouthakis BIB96957305 up until June 2018 which gives an idea on how interest in this field has grown over time. Figure 9 shows the distribution of journal publications using different synthesis techniques by year where PA stands for pinch analysis, MP is mathematical programming and PA-MP is a combined pinch analysis and mathematical programming approach. Figure 10 gives a percentage summary of the applications of these techniques. Figure 9 shows that in 77 contributions, the mathematical programming (MP) method was applied; pinch analysis (PA) technique was used in 244 contributions, while a combination of a combined pinch analysis and mathematical programming (PA-MP) was applied in 18 contributions. It is evident that the pinch analysis technique is well researched and has been used the most by researchers in the field of process integration. In addition, mathematical programming techniques in HENs and MENs synthesis was first introduced as early as 1977, but its application for energy and material minimization was not fully considered afterwards. According to the time frame considered in this review , full application of mathematical programming for environmental sustainability studies was reported only after 2002, while the combination of pinch analysis and mathematical programming started in 2003, and till date it has not been adequately researched compared to other methods. It is also worthy to note that there has been an increasing number of publications in the application of process synthesis techniques in the last 8 years (2010-2018). Figure 10 shows that 65% of the aforementioned contributions were used in heat exchanger network (HEN) synthesis, and 26% of the reported techniques were applied in mass exchanger network (MEN) synthesis, while a combined HEN and MENs synthesis accounted for only 9%. The trend observed in this section reveals that combined pinch-mathematical programming techniques for the synthesis of a combined heat and mass exchangers still need further research and development research and more concerted research efforts should be directed towards it. Hence, it forms a major recommendation from this review.