Heat and mass exchanger network synthesis remains an area of continuous development in process engineering due to the current trend of increasing energy and material costs. Heat and mass exchanger networks use available heat in a process through the exchange that occurs between hot and cold process streams to decrease energy demands, utility costs and capital investment in most industrial processes. Integration of heat and mass exchanger networks for industrial applications can improve the economics of plant operation. Several advances have been reported for the design of heat and mass exchanger networks using approaches which involve the pinch point and mathematical programming. Recently, simultaneous design and optimization methodologies have been proposed BIB42237728 . Due to the complex nature of most mathematical equations involved in the synthesis of heat and mass exchanger networks, the application of mathematical programming in process synthesis could be achieved by simplifying various superstructures and model equations through the use of simplified capital cost functions. Mathematical programming has also shown significant potentials in solving HENs and MENs problem with the recent advancement in computing technology. It deals mainly with heat integration, synthesis of heat and mass exchanger networks or synthesis of process schemes and process subsystems. It is remarkable to note that the final effect of the synchronized method is not only the expected reduction in energy consumption, but also the reduction in raw material consumption. The scope of process integration through mathematical programming has improved in recent times and it can be applied in process industries to optimize heat and mass exchanger networks for carbon emission reduction and water minimization BIB110640025 BIB54942688 . The foremost role of mathematical programming in synthesis of HENs and MENs is to improve concepts (and also create new ones) by expressing them in precise forms to obtain ideal and feasible solutions of complex problems BIB11462492 . Apposite trade-offs between raw materials, operating and investment costs as well as product income can be established by applying mathematical programming in overall systems concurrently, thus attaining accurately integrated details. Mathematical programming techniques in the synthesis of HENs and MENs require postulation of a superstructure of alternatives (whether it involves a high level aggregated model or a detailed model). The main issues associated with postulating superstructures for HENs and MENs include the major type of representations that can be used, its modelling implications, and the feasible alternatives that must be included to guarantee that the global optimum is not ignored. To analytically generate superstructures that contain all the alternatives of interest in a process such as CO 2 capture, a graphical-theoretical approach with polynomial complexities is proposed in this review to find all interconnections in process networks with nodes for processes and chemicals adequately specified. Apart from the selection of superstructures, the choice of a detailed optimization model is also necessary for an effective energy and material minimization. Postulation of superstructures and selection of optimization models will be a very reliable procedure in synthesizing process networks for waste minimization during CO 2 capture. Mathematical programming in combination with pinch analysis can be used in a hybrid manner to synthesize a combined heat and mass exchanger network that will minimize both energy consumption and excessive material usage simultaneously during CO 2 capture. Pinch analysis techniques should be used to set the energy targets, while mathematical programming can then be used to synthesize the networks by building upon the existing SYNHEAT model in General Algebraic Modeling System (GAMS) software. A detailed methodology for this is diagrammatically presented in Fig. 12 . Aggregated mixed-integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) models can also be used in mathematical programming. This reduces the computational difficulties associated with mathematical programming and improves the synthesis process. The aggregated MILP model suitable for studies of this nature is the transshipment model. The model uses pinch location methods to calculate the minimum amount of energy expended and material consumed during CO 2 capture BIB115103231 . This procedure is easy to embed in any mathematical programming model for process synthesis. It can also perform a simultaneous flowsheet synthesis and heat integration because it has both mathematical programming and pinch analysis integrated in it BIB37837057 BIB118907152 .