Heat integration is mostly applied in energy systems when examining the potential of improving heat exchange between heat sources and heat sinks to reduce the amount of external heating and cooling utilities which is a way of ensuring energy minimization BIB55982784 BIB110640025 BIB109506976 . Heat integration during CO 2 capture could be a reliable method for reducing the high energy penalty associated with most CO 2 capture technologies. Researchers have developed new calculation methods for energy and material minimization as well as design of heat exchanger and coupling of utilities in many energy-intensive processes with minimum temperature difference through heat integration using pinch concepts BIB111238320 BIB54942688 BIB98387421 . However, the application of pinch analysis alone cannot adequately achieve a simultaneous energy and material minimization in a process such as CO 2 capture. This is because, heat transfer occurs in most of these systems with some inefficiency due to unavoidable stack losses. This makes the heat value of the burnt fuel always greater than that absorbed by the process. As a result, energy and material consumption cost may not be easily evaluated directly from the energy targets indicated in the pinch diagrams. It has also been pointed out in previous research BIB54942688 BIB98387421 that the loss of some important information can occur when process and utility streams are combined into the same grand composite curve (GCC). This loss of information has led to missed opportunities in designing an optimal network for energy and material minimization. To provide solution to the aforementioned problem posed by the pinch technique, researchers have come up with different methodologies for a simultaneous energy and material minimization during CO 2 capture. For instance, in the studies reported by Romeo et al. BIB110793482 and Berstad et al.  , calcium looping was recommended as the most suitable CO 2 capture technique for effective energy and material minimization. This is because the researchers envisaged that the waste CaO from CO 2 capture in a cement plant can be combined with waste energy from the clinker cooling and CO 2 capture system which can then be used to generate additional power without the utilization of coal. Furthermore, part of the power generated can be used for CO 2 compression. The purge from the CO 2 capture system can also be used as input to the cement plant, thus reducing the raw material consumption and fuel usage for the calcination of the saved limestone. By applying this method, the authors confirmed a lower CO 2 avoidance cost with the integrated process than with any other combination method (either with power plants and CO 2 capture system, or cement plants with CO 2 capture systems). As such, the authors proposed that if these three processes are integrated, about 94% of CO 2 that would have been emitted into the atmosphere can be avoided because of the energetic efficiency augmentation associated with the integrated processes. However, a major drawback of this integrated process is that both systems have to operate simultaneously and this requires a lot of energy consumption although material usage could be minimized. Furthermore, there could be some effects of sulphur and CaSO 4 formed during the CO 2 capture process on the cement characteristics and the deactivated CaO in the clinker during production, thus reducing the quality of cement produced from the integrated cement production plant. Nemet et al. BIB154525401 reported a new methodology for heat integration with emphasis on optimization of heat exchanger networks' cost over a long period. The authors developed a deterministic and stochastic multi-period mixed-integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) model for synthesis of heat exchanger networks in which the utility cost coefficients were forecasted for the lifetime of the process. The stochastic approach was applied to the simultaneous consideration of future price projections of HENs, while the multi-period approach with future price projections was applied for sustainable design of HENs with higher heat recovery and, consequently, with lower utility consumption. The study revealed that utility savings were 18.4% for hot and 32.6% for cold utility, yielding an increase in the net present value (NPV) by 7.8%. As much as this proposed methodology was useful for minimizing heat energy usage, it could not be conveniently applied in the case of CO 2 capture due to the fact that CO 2 capture is a simultaneous heat and mass exchange process, which involves the application of both heat and mass exchange networks. In view of this, the proposed methodology is not sufficient for energy and material minimization studies because it is limited to only heat exchanger networks. Mohd-Nawi et al.  suggested a new algebraic technique for total site carbon integration. This proposed technique is capable of minimizing energy requirement during carbon capture, utilization and storage. The method was applied to a hypothetical case study to determine potential CO 2 exchange using CO 2 headers at different percentage purity as well as a central pure CO 2 generator. The authors reported a 43% reduction in CO 2 emission with reduced energy consumption using this novel technique. The proposed targeting technique could be used by carbon planners to conduct further analysis and feasibility studies involving carbon capture storage and utilization. However, the technique did not include analysis of more carbon capture methods as well as a techno-economic study to ascertain its applicability on a large scale. It is envisaged in this review that a combined application of the aforementioned techniques in integrated symbiotic systems might further minimize energy usage and also reduce energy penalty associated with most CO 2 capture technologies. Escudero et al. BIB110656670 applied a pinch analysis approach in combination with Aspen plus simulation to evaluate the heat recovery options and to design an optimized heat exchanger network for a specified power plant. The authors used an Aspen Plus simulation model to simulate the power plant (including all the subsystems and the new networks). At the end, the authors reported a net increase of about 32.5% in the net efficiency of the power plant. Energy penalty was also reduced from 10.54 to 7.28 efficiency points using this concept. However, CO 2 capture is a simultaneous mass and heat exchange process, and the authors did not consider the synthesis of mass exchanger networks to take care of external mass separating agents or utilities in their study. Nevertheless, synthesis of a hybrid network that considers simultaneous heat and mass exchange for effective design of a CO 2 capture network as proposed in this paper is capable of minimizing the external mass separating agents and utilities involved in the design. Most methodologies for energy and material minimization investigated in the past come with limitations such as computational difficulties, high cost of technology and material wastage. To fill this gap, this paper proposes the development of integrated methods for CO 2 capture (including mass and heat integration networks) because integration of heat and mass exchange networks have resulted in significant saving of heat energy and mass (materials) in other processes in the past BIB95423052 BIB108939018 . Industrial heat and mass exchanger networks are important because of their role in recovering material and process heat in a process effectively. Mass exchanger network synthesis via mathematical programming is also an important strategy for screening mass separating agents as well as satisfying mass transfer demands in a CO 2 capture process while ensuring that environmental and economic requirements are met BIB102126094 . Synthesis of a combined heat and mass exchanger network using a hybrid technique comprising both pinch analysis and mathematical programming is recommended for problems involving heat and mass exchanger networks such as CO 2 capture. The suggested hybrid approach in this review is new and, as far as could be ascertained, has not been applied in any CO 2 capture study for energy and material minimization. Figure 8a is a composite curve showing reduction of the internal carbon footprint of a CO 2 -emitting power plant while Fig. 8b denotes the benchmark value for CO 2 emission together with internal and external carbon footprints. Figure 8a , b illustrates how a graphical pinch analysis technique enhances the decision-making by prioritizing strategies for carbon footprint reduction in a single power plant. Table 2 gives a summary of the process synthesis techniques, methods and focus area reported till date.