Sequential synthesis of heat and mass exchanger networks involve the use of pinch concepts and graphical illustrations to decompose a heat or mass exchanger network design problem into sub-problems to minimize energy costs, number of units, investment costs and the amount of material to be consumed BIB95723901 . Partitioning the design problem into a series of sub-problems helps to reduce the computational requirements for obtaining an optimal network design. For a typical heat exchanger network design problem, the sequential method can be carried out by dividing the temperature range of the problem into temperature intervals, while for a typical mass exchanger network design task, the problem is divided into composition intervals. These intervals are then used for modelling heat and mass exchange while obeying some heuristic and thermodynamic laws. Since a typical CO 2 capture system involves fluctuation of parameters such as stream inlet temperatures, gas flow rates and heat capacities, due to issues such as changes in environmental conditions, changes in feed quality, process upsets and other disturbances, it is recommended in this paper that a multiperiod synthesis network approach should be considered for the design of CO 2 capture networks. A schematic of a proposed pinch technology-based methodology for synthesizing HENs and MENs for energy and material minimization during CO 2 capture is presented in Figs. 3 and 4 , respectively, while Table 1 compares different techniques for energy and  material minimization. The application of pinch-based design techniques in HENs after subdividing the problem into temperature intervals is dependent on a minimum heat recovery approach temperature (HRAT), while in MENs it is dependent on the minimum allowable composition difference 'ε' BIB101639832 . In this paper, it is suggested that the locations of bottlenecks for energy savings and material minimization are found for multi-period HENS and MENS, before the minimum energy usage is determined. These bottlenecks are known as the energy recovery pinch points. The pinch points can be more than one, depending on the number of periods of the network. In addition, there is also a possibility for the existence or non-existence of pinch points. The different pinch points obtained or a calculated global pinch point can then be used to decompose the heat and mass exchanger network into sub-networks. Minimum number of heat exchanger unit and minimum number of mass exchanger unit for the network can be determined using Eqs. (1) and (2), respectively, depending on whether a pinch point exists or not: where NS AP is the total number of steams above the pinch and NS BP is the total number of streams below the pinch.