Energy penalty can be reduced in a number of ways and this solely depends on the CO 2 capture technology used BIB14499130 . According to Jassim and Rochelle BIB98319426 , high energy penalty associated with chemical absorption systems during sorbent regeneration can be lowered by varying the solvents used. Yoro and Sekoai  suggested the use of additives such as piperazine in amine systems during CO 2 capture by chemical absorption to reduce the high energy requirement during sorbent regeneration in absorption systems. Reddy et al.  suggested the application of the Fluor Econamine Plus process for energy minimization. This technology involves a combination of improved solvent formulation with an improved process design which includes absorber intercooling, split flow arrangements, integrated steam generation and stripping with flash steam to reduce total energy consumption. The authors claimed that about 20% reduction in energy penalty associated with CO 2 capture was achieved in pilot studies with Fluor Econamine Plus process in original monoethanolamine plants. Conversely, the major drawback is that the methodology is limited to only absorption technique and does not provide a solution for minimization of extra utilities (mass) during the process. Stankewitz et al.  recommended the use of ammonia cycle to generate energy from the available waste heat in a monoethanolamine-based CO 2 capture system retrofitted to a power plant. By applying the ammonia cycle method, the authors observed that energy penalty reduced significantly from 28 to 22%. However, the major challenge associated with this method is that the ammonia condenser must be operated with continuous flow of cooling water at 15 °C. If the ammonia condenser is operated with cooling water at a warmer temperature above 15 °C, the said level of efficiency would not be achieved. A report published by the international energy agency revealed that the utilization of waste heat streams to increase the overall plant efficiency and reduce energy penalty during CO 2 capture is a suitable option for energy penalty reduction and maintaining good plant efficiency [122] . In this method, a hot water stream was used for coal pre-drying in the flue gas line before desulphurization; the stripper-condenser and the CO 2 compressor intercoolers can also be used to heat the boiler feed water thereby completely removing the need for the existing boiler feed water heaters. However, the report did not state whether the heat energy saved is better utilized within the power plant itself to improve the overall efficiency. Table 3 summarizes the selected CO 2 capture methods, their energy consumption and net plant efficiency after retrofitting CO 2 capture devices as reported by several authors in the past. It was observed in Table 3 that energy consumption increased while net plant efficiency dropped drastically in most studies after retrofitting CO 2 capture devices, hence the need for heat and mass integration. So far, several researchers have suggested the utilization of waste heat during CO 2 capture to reduce energy penalty associated with retrofitting CCS devices onto a power plant BIB206550953  BIB113553635 BIB206550023 . However, plant efficiency, optimum energy and material usage are usually compromised while attempting to capture CO 2 by retrofitting CO 2 capture devices on existing power plants. New methods to reduce energy penalty during CO 2 capture while maintaining stable plant efficiency BIB109037032 are highly sought for till date. Synthesis of a combined heat and mass exchange network for this purpose could proffer a lasting solution to the drop in plant efficiency, high energy and material consumption associated with retrofitting CCS devices in power plants. As far as could be ascertained from previous studies, no report in open literature has applied process integration vis-à-vis pinch analysis together with mathematical programming in a combined manner to systemically integrate a CCS system within a power plant for energy penalty and material usage minimization during CO 2 capture; as such, it can form a very interesting topic for future research.