• Despite the tremendous potentials of heat and mass integration for utility minimization, limited investigations have been reported for synthesis of heat and mass exchanger networks for energy and material minimization in CO 2 capture studies. This field constitutes an emerging area of research in the scientific community, and application of process synthesis techniques to solve problems in environmental studies will be one of the hot research topics in future. • Heat and mass integration techniques proposed in this review could be extended in future research to take into account a combined heat and mass exchanger network for CO 2 capture, which can also be linked to a regeneration network to account for energy and material loss during sorbent regeneration. This has not been given adequate attention in the past and could constitute a potential research topic in this field. • Combination of pinch analysis with mathematical programming in a single methodology is still a more effective technique during heat and mass integration in CO 2 capture systems compared to other methods previously reported in literature. A hybrid network optimization approach may also be tried for heat and mass exchanger applications in future studies. • Life cycle assessment (LCA) of heat and mass exchangers should be carried out in future studies to investigate its environmental impact using mixed-integer linear and nonlinear programming mathematical models. • To ensure effective utilization of CO 2 with minimized material wastage using the strategies highlighted in this review, future R&D could consider a detailed design of a transport network to transport captured CO 2 from different power plants to a central storage site or utilization point.