Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is a promising technology that aims at reducing CO 2 emissions from large point sources such as power plants  BIB134651311 BIB199087806 . However, high energy demands and excessive material usage associated with CO 2 compression and separation processes have been the main challenges currently facing the commercialization of most CO 2 capture and storage technologies BIB102888765 . There is a need to save energy and minimize material usage during CO 2 capture to ensure the economic advantage of the capture technology BIB14632042 BIB55992340 . This is because, the cost of energy and materials for CO 2 capture has increased and this trend is expected to continue with an increase of about 13.4% by the year 2040 due to consistent high energy demand from many industrialized nations globally  . The challenge of energy and excessive use of materials in process industries can be tackled to a large extent by minimizing the consumption of energy and mass  . In the context of this review, energy refers to the heat required during sorbent regeneration, while material (mass) refers to the mass separating agents (sorbents) and external utilities such as cooling water and steam which ought to be minimized during CO 2 capture. Heat and mass exchanger network retrofitting is envisaged as a promising option for reducing energy and material consumption which could lead to enhanced economic and environmental sustainability. The main aim of heat exchanger networks (HENs) and mass exchanger networks (MENs) retrofitting is to decrease the external energy demand and extra material consumption by increasing heat and mass exchange simultaneously among process streams in an existing process plant BIB109218487 BIB96957305 . HENs and MENs retrofitting can be performed using pinch analysis and/or mathematical programming. Over the past decades, systematic methods based on simultaneous mathematical programming and sequential techniques have been applied to achieve improved energy and material minimization in chemical process industries BIB109218487 . Literature is rich in various process integration methods to minimize excessive heat energy consumption and material usage in different industrial processes. For example, El-Halwagi and Manousiouthakis BIB96957305 suggested the synthesis of mass and heat exchanger networks for effective material and heat minimization in industrial processes. Considering the need for energy minimization and effective material usage in energy-intensive industrial processes, some authors focused on distillation processes BIB113868542 BIB54073450 , bioethanol production process BIB96297918 , calcium looping systems BIB111020319 , and COG sweetening BIB96957305 . Most of the reports available on CO 2 capture studies have focused on developing materials for CO 2 capture and storage BIB111020319 BIB103973765 BIB116274062 without considering how to minimize its associated high energy requirements. Few studies that discussed ways to minimize high energy penalty and material minimization considered the use of additives such as piperazine and KOH to reduce the energy requirement for CO 2 absorption using monoethanolamine  BIB99838058 BIB97030879 . However, it is worthy to note that the techniques available for CO 2 capture do not only involve gas-liquid absorption, but also the use of solid materials and membranes. Techniques for minimization of energy and material consumption during CO 2 capture using solid sorbents have not been given much attention in literature. Application of HENs and MENs in this field could proffer a solution to energy and material minimization. Major techniques that have been used to synthesize HENs and MENs in the past have been summarized in Fig. 1 under simultaneous and sequential techniques. This review presents exhaustive information on the potential application of HENs and MENs as an optimal process integration strategy for energy and material minimization during CO 2 capture. The paper begins with the presentation of an optimal process development strategy during CO BIB134651311 capture, followed by the synthesis techniques for HENs and MENs. Synthesis of a combined heat and mass exchange network for minimization of energy and material consumption during CO 2 capture is then discussed because of the integral relationship between heat and mass during CO 2 capture. At the end of this review, a combined technique for the synthesis of heat and mass exchanger networks is suggested as a strategy to fully harness the benefits inherent in simultaneous optimization of the two networks using mathematical programming techniques. Finally, future prospects for energy penalty reduction in various CO 2 capture technologies are highlighted and future research topics suggested. A schematic overview of this review is presented in Fig. 2 .