Process integration has been widely embraced as an integral part of process intensification which can be used in describing specific system-oriented activities related to process design with applications exclusively focused on resource conservation, pollution prevention and energy management BIB11364655 BIB11998207 . Synthesis, analysis and optimization are the three basic components in any effective process integration methodology. Process integration has a significant effect on many chemical industries through heat exchanger network optimization. The application of process integration in CO 2 capture systems makes it possible to identify the optimal process development strategy for the capture networks as well as identifying the most cost-effective way to complete the CO 2 capture process BIB97987091 BIB110985015 BIB55982784 . Amongst the available process integration methodologies, pinch analysis is currently the most commonly used. This could be attributed to the simple nature of its underlying concepts and the spectacular results it has presented in numerous studies in the past. Hence, it forms a major point of discussion in this review. Although pinch analysis has been reported for various energy and resource saving studies in the past, its application in energy and material minimization studies with respect to CO 2 capture system is still new and cannot be traced to any current report in open literature. For example, Kemp [29] reported the application of pinch analysis for the efficient use and minimization in a dryer where a direct reduction of dryer heat duty was discussed. Despite the huge success of the pinch technique reported by the author for energy minimization, the principles have not In scenarios where CO 2 -producing plants are co-located within an industrial development zone or geographical area, it is imperative to design an optimal network for energy reduction and efficient resource usage using process network integration as this will offer immense opportunities for energy and resource sharing amongst the plants. Ooi et al. BIB110531516 reported an investigation on general CCS planning using pinch analysis technique where a novel graphical targeting tool was proposed to address the problem associated with storing captured CO 2 from power-generating plants into reservoirs. The limitation here is that the study was constrained to just CO 2 storage without looking critically into simultaneous energy and material minimization during the capture process. In another study, Wan-Alwi et al.  discussed an extended pinch analysis concept to determine the minimum electricity target for systems with hybrid renewable energy sources using power pinch analysis. The authors mainly emphasized the application of pinch analysis with respect to energy usage during power generation in power plants without a direct extension of the concepts in CO 2 capture systems which are unique. Such uniqueness lies in the fact that energy enhances mass transfer, both in absorption and regeneration, in CO 2 capture processes. Extending the power pinch analysis to CO 2 capture networks will be highly beneficial since it integrates hybrid energy sources. However, the power pinch concept will need to be modified to accommodate separation processes which are found in CO 2 capture systems. Graphical pinch location methods to determine the amount of material consumed in industrial processes is presented in Figs. 6 and 7. These figures, which are called the composite curves in pinch technology, are analogues of each other. Figure 6 is for MENS, while Fig. 7 is for HENS. If the pinch technology method is applied in CCS networks, Fig. 6 would involve targeting the minimum flows of CO 2 absorbents and regenerants, while Fig. 7 would involve setting targets for the amount of energy required to achieve optimum absorbent/regeneration temperatures, as well as other energy needs of the overall integrated network. Table 1 presents a list of strategies that have been used for energy and material minimization in CO 2 capture systems. The table also shows whether the methodology is applicable for simultaneous heat and mass exchange. Information in Table 1 shows that application of heat and mass integration techniques in CO 2 capture systems can minimize both energy and material simultaneously. According to the literature reports reviewed so far, it is evident that researchers have made significant efforts to develop new strategies for energy minimization in many industrial applications on one hand. On the other hand, methodologies for material usage minimization have also been developed. However, most of the suggested strategies do not involve a concurrent minimization of both energy and mass. This review suggests that energy consumption and material usage can be minimized simultaneously during industrial processes like CO 2 capture using a combined heat and mass integration approach.