Undoubtedly, the challenge of high energy consumption and excessive material wastage in many industrial applications has fuelled the need to search for sustainable ways to minimize excessive energy and material consumption. Consequently, this review has focussed on the recent application of process integration techniques towards energy and material minimization during CO 2 capture. The following conclusions have been drawn from this review; • High consumption of energy and materials associated with most CO 2 capture methods has hindered its implementation and commercialization on a pilot scale in most developing countries. Implementation of inexpensive strategies such as heat and mass integration as suggested in this paper to check this limitation could boost its process development and large-scale application. • Till date, the use of inhibitors and additives has been the common strategy used to minimize high energy requirement in energy-intensive processes such as absorptive CO 2 capture. However, the use of these additives is only suitable in gas-liquid absorption systems and cannot be fully extended to gas-solid adsorption or membrane systems during CO 2 capture because it is limited in terms of solvent capacity. • Application of heat and mass integration techniques through the synthesis of heat and mass exchanger networks play a very crucial role in the improvement of system efficiency in industrial processes. It has proven to be a reliable strategy to minimize high energy and material consumption in both liquid and solid sorbents applications; hence, it is applicable in all CO 2 capture methods. • Since a typical CO 2 capture methodology involves both heat and mass exchange occurring simultaneously, a combined heat and mass integration network could be synthesized to concurrently minimize energy and material minimization in CO 2 capture studies using the methodologies proposed in this review.