The main focus of real applications on deep learning for image denoising has two kinds: single end-to-end CNN and the combination of prior knowledge and CNN. For the first method, changing the network architecture is popular to remove the noise from the given real corrupted image. Multiscale is very effective for image denoising. For example, a CNN comprising of convolution, ReLU and RL employed different phase features to enhance the expressive ability of the low-light image denoising model BIB3670949 . To overcome the blurry and false image artifacts, a dual U-Net with skip connection was proposed for CT image reconstruction BIB121126 . To address resource-constraint problem, Tian et al. BIB203042751 used a dual CNN with batch renormalization BIB6961711 , RL and dilated convolutions to deal with real noisy image. According to the nature of light image, two CNNs utilized anisotropic parallax analysis to generate structural parallax information for real noisy images BIB44091719 . Additionally, using CNN to resolve remote sense BIB155950517 and medical images  under low-light condition is very effective  . To extract more detailed information, recurrent connections were used to enhance the representative ability to deal with corrupted image in the real world BIB34878639 BIB119304666 . To deal with unknown real noisy images, a residual structure was utilized to facilitate low-frequency features, then, an attention mechanism BIB210947816 can be applied to extract more potential features from channels BIB118713138 . From the point of view of producing the noisy image, imitating cameral pipelines to construct the degradation model was very effective to filter the real noisy BIB121123693 . Detailed information of these researches can be shown in Table 4 . BIB210947816 CNN Gaussian image denoising, blind denoising and real noisy image denoising CNN with attention mechanism and sparse method for image denoising For the second method, combining CNN and prior can better deal with both speed and complex noise task in real noisy image. Zhang et al. BIB1900475 proposed to use half quadratic splitting (HQS) and CNN to estimate the noise from the given real noisy image. After that, Guo et al. BIB49672261 proposed a three-phase denoising method. The first phase used Gaussian noise and in-cameral processing pipeline to synthesize noisy image. The synthetic and real noisy images are merged to better represent real noisy images. The second phase used sub-network with asymmetric and total variation losses to estimate the noise of real noisy image. The third phase exploited original noisy image and estimated noise to recover the latent clean image. Additionally, CNN with channel prior was effective for low-light image enhancement BIB3449252 . To make readers easily observe, we use Table 5 to show the detailed information of these researches.  CNN Real noisy image dneoising GAN with attentive mechanism and noise domain for real noisy image denoising