In the real world, the image is easily corrupted and noise is complex. Thus, blind denoising technique is important  . At first, FFDNet BIB10514149 used noise level and noise as the input of CNN to train a denoiser for unknown noisy image. Then, scholars proposed a lot of methods to solve blind denoisng problem. According to the mechanism of image device, Kenzo et al. BIB3363018 utilized soft shrinkage to adjust the noise level for blind denoising. For unpaired noisy image, using CNNs to estimate noise became a good tool  . Yang et al. BIB3453284 used known noise level to train a denoiser, then, they utilized this denoiser to estimate the level of noise. For random noise attenuation problem, CNN with RL was used to filter complex noise   . Additionally, changing network architecture can promote the denoising performance for blind denoising. Majumdar et al. BIB51612840 presented to use auto-encoder to tackle unknown noise. For mixed noise, cascaded CNNs were effective to remove the AWAG and impulse noise, respectively BIB146043614 . To clear show these denoising methods, Table 6 is designed as follows. BIB3453284 CNN Blind denoising GAN for blind image denoising It is known that noise is ruleless and complex in the real world. Thus, blind denoising techniques, especially deep learning techniques are developed. For this reason, comparing the denoising performance of different deep learning techniques is very meaningful. The state-of-the-art denoising methods such as DnCNN, FFDNet, SCNN and G2G1 on the BSD68 and Set12 are chosen to design experiments. As shown in Tables 16 and 17 , the FFDNet is superior to other methods in blind denoising.