Automatic feature extraction methods are important to reduce computational costs for image applications BIB20954902 BIB122575721 BIB51614639 . CNNs based on this reason are developed for image denoising  BIB4909124 . Zhang et al. BIB996788 proposed a model as well as DnCNN to deal with multiple low-level BIB5808102 and residual learning techniques BIB206594692 . Wang et al. BIB21698037 , Bae et al. BIB11750584 and Jifara et al. BIB23381686 also presented a residual learning and deeper CNN for image denoising, respectively. However, deeper CNN technique depended on deeper layer rather than shallow layer, which resulted in long-term dependency problem. To tackle this problem, a lot of signal-base methods were proposed. Tai et al. BIB8550762 exploited recursive and gate units to adaptively mine more accurate features and recover clean images. Inspired by low-rank Hankel matrix in low-level vision, Ye et al. BIB36765461 provided convolution frames to explain the connection between signal processing and deep learning by convolving local and nonlocal bases. For solving insufficient noisy images (i.e. hyperspectral and medical images), a lot of recent works try to extract more useful information by improved CNN BIB59233995 BIB139797334 BIB59601575 BIB132877985 . For example, Yuan et al. BIB44131640 combined deep CNN, residual learning and multiscale knowledge to remove the noise from hyperspectral-noisy images. However, using these operations may increase computational costs and memory consumption, which was not optimistic for real applications. For addressing the phenomenon, Gholizadeh et al. BIB53099389 utilized dilated convolutions  to enlarge receptive field and reduce depth of network at no bring extra cost for CT image denoising. Lian et al. BIB127462633 proposed a residual network via multi-scale cross-path concatenation to suppress the noise. It is known from most of methods above relied on improved CNNs to deal with the noise. Thus, designing network architectures is important for image denoising   . Changing network architectures has the following ways in general  BIB58021842 : (1) fusing features from multiple inputs of a CNN. (2) Changing the loss function. (3) Increasing depth or width of the CNN. (4) Adding some auxiliary plug-ins into CNNs. 5) Using skip connections or cascade operations into CNNs. Specifically, the first way included three types: 1) different parts of one sample as multiple inputs from different networks  . 2) Different perspectives for the one sample as input, such as multiple scales BIB52118266 BIB52250307 . 3) Different channels of a CNN as input BIB21576213 . The second way mainly designed different loss function according to characteristic of nature images to extract more robust features BIB81979655 . For example, Chen et al. BIB57483713 jointed Euclidean and perceptual loss functions to mine more edge information for image denoising. The third way enlarged receptive field size to improve denoising performance via increasing the depth or width of network BIB52189901 BIB58670726 BIB59601410 . The fourth way applied plug-ins, i.e. activation function, dilated convolution, fully connected layer and pooling operations to enhance the expressive ability of the CNN BIB53240191  BIB52346745 . The final way utilized skip connections BIB51877426 BIB52952008 BIB54445253 BIB22467467 or cascade operations BIB127462633 BIB146083870 to provide complementary information for deep layer in CNN. Table 1 provides an overview of CNNs for AWNI denoising.