Deep learning techniques in image denoising have been widely applied in recent years. This paper has offered a survey to make readers comprehensively understand these methods. The pre-20 vious sections have shown the detailed information of existing methods. This section mainly presents the potential research points for image denoising and points out unsolved problems as follows. Base deep learning techniques image denoising mainly has good effect on denoising performance, denoising efficiency and complex denoising task. For promoting the denoising perfor- mance, there are the following solutions. 1) Enlarging the receptive field can capture more context information to improve the denoising performance. Increasing the depth and width of the networks are the common ways to enlarge the receptive field. However, that results in higher computational cost and more memory consumption. For resolving the problem, dilated convolution technique is a good choice to make performance and efficiency, which is very effective to mine more edge information. 2) The simultaneous use of extra information (also called prior) and CNN is very beneficial to facilitate more accurate features. That is implemented by designing the loss function. 3) Combining local and global information can enhance the memory abilities of the shallow layers on deep layers to better filter the noise. The residual operation and recursive operation are typical methods to address this problem. 4) Single processing methods can better suppress the noise. Inspired by that, the single processing technique fused into the deep CNN can pursue excellent performance. For example, the wavelet technique is gathered into the U-Net to deal with image restoration BIB29151865 . 5) Data Augmentation, such as horizontal flip, vertical flip and color jittering can make the denoising methods learn more types of noise, which can enhance the expressive ability of the denoising models. Additionally, using the GAN to construct virtual noisy image is also useful for image denoising. 6) Transfer learning, graph and neural architecture search methods can obtain good denoising results. 7) Improving the hardware or camera mechanism can reduce the effect of noise on the captured image. For improving denoising efficiency, compressing deep network has obtained great success. Reducing the depth or the width of deep network can reduce the complexity of deep network in image denoising. Also, using small convolutional kernel and group convolution can reduce the number of parameters for accelerating the speed of training. Fusion of dimension reduction method, such as principal component analysis (PCA) and CNN also better improves the denoising efficiency. For tackling complex noisy image, step-by-step processing is very popular. For example, using two-step mechanism deals with a noisy image with low-resolution. The first step recovers a highresolution image by a CNN. The second step uses a novel CNN to filter the noise of the highresolution image. The two CNNs are implemented via cascade operation. Additionally, utilizing CNN to deal with unsupervised noise is also a good choice. Although deep learning techniques have obtained great success in three aspects above, there are still some challenges in image denoising. 1) Deeper denoising networks require more memory resource. 2) Training deeper denoising networks is not stable for real noisy image, unpaired noisy image and multi-degradation tasks. 3) Real noisy images are not easily captured, which results in inadequate training samples. 4) Deep CNNs are difficult to solve unsupervised denoising task. 5) Find more accurate metrics for image denoising. The PSNR and SSIM are popular metrics for image restoration task. However, the PSNR suffers from excessing smoothing, which may recognize the difference of between indistinguishable images. The SSIM depends on brightness, contrast and structure, which can not accurately evaluate image perceptual quality. Thus, more useful metrics for image denoising are extremely urgent.