It is known that machine learning uses optimization techniques BIB21780790 BIB145820585 and discriminative learning methods BIB102351946 BIB21688980 to deal with image applications in general. Although optimization methods have good performance on different low-level vision tasks, these methods need manual setting parameters, which were time-consuming. The discriminative learning methods have fast speed in image restoration. However, they are not flexible for various low-level vision tasks. To make a tradeoff between efficiency and flexibility, discriminative learning optimization-based method BIB7005200 BIB4413100 was presented for image applications, such as image denoising. The CNN with prior knowledge via regular term of loss function is common method in image denosing  , which can mainly divide two categories to filter the noise: 1) improvement of denoising speed. 2) Improvement of denoising performance. For improving denoising speed, optimization method cooperated CNN was a good tool to rapidly find optimal solution in image denoising BIB59526108 BIB49907760 . For example, a GAN with maximum a posteriori (MAP) was used to estimate the noise and deal with other tasks, such as image inpainting and super-resolution BIB52290327 . An experience-based greedy and transfer learning strategies with CNN can accelerate genetic algorithm to obtain a clean image BIB52276957 . Noisy image and noise level mapping were as inputs of CNN, which had faster execution in predicting the noise  . For improving the denoising performance, CNN combined optimization methods to make noisy image smooth BIB102351190 BIB3624392 BIB13536387 . CNN with total variation (TV) reduced the effect of noise pixels BIB1245438 . Spliting Bregman iteration algorithm and CNN  can enhance pixels through image depth to obtain the latent clean image. A dual-stage CNN with feature matching can better recover the detailed information of the clean image, especially noisy images BIB56176402 . The GAN with nearest neighbor had good effect between noisy and clean images, and filtered the noisy image BIB58005763 . Wavefront coding jointed CNN to enhance pixels of latent clean image via transform domain BIB58671606 . Additionally, there are other excellent denoising methods as shown in BIB84843405 BIB67876506 BIB4740679 . Table  3 shows that detailed information of the combination of optimization method and CNN/NN in AWNI denoising.