Digital image devices have widely applied in many fields, such as individual recognition BIB1402370 BIB58670511 BIB58641488 , and remote sensing BIB132039711 . The captured image is a degraded image from the latent observation, where the degradation processing is affected by some factors, such as lighting and noise corruption   . Specifically, the noise is generated in the processing of transmission and compression from the unknown latent observation. Thus, at first, it is very essential to sigmoid  and tanh BIB206769720 ) resulted in high computational cost. Thirdly, the hardware platform did not support the complex network. That was broken by AlexNet in 2012 ImageNet Large-Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) BIB207763512 . After that, deep network architectures (e.g. VGG BIB14124313 and GoogleNet BIB206592484 ) were widely applied in fields of image BIB88498086 BIB4556652 , video   , nature language processing  and speech processing BIB21955893 , especially low-level computer vision BIB127067164 BIB53096525 . Deep network was first applied in image denoising in 2015  BIB16845002 . The proposed network need not manually set parameters for removing the noise. After then, deep network were widely applied in speech BIB35352656 and image restoration BIB10987457 . Mao et al. BIB10987457 used multiple convolutions and deconvolutions to suppress the noise and recover the high-resolution image. For addressing multiple low-level tasks via a model, a denoising CNN (DnCNN) BIB996788 consisting of convolutions, batch normalization (BN) BIB5808102 , rectified linear unit (ReLU) BIB15539264 and residual learning (RL) BIB206594692 was proposed to deal with image denoising, super-resolution, and JPEG image deblocking. Taking into account between denoising performance and speed, a color non-local network (CNL-Net) BIB10352330 combined non-local self-similarity (NLSS) and CNN to efficiently remove color-image noise. In terms of blind denoising, a fast and flexible denoising CNN (FFDNet) BIB10514149 presented different noise levels and the noisy image patch as input of denoising network to improve denosing speed and process blind denoising. For handling unpaired noisy images, a generative adversarial network (GAN) CNN blind denoiser (GCBD) BIB51989956 used two phases to resolve this problem. The first phase was used to generate the ground truth. The second phase utilized obtained ground truth into the GAN to train the denoiser. Alternatively, a convolutional blind denoising network (CBD-Net) BIB49672261 removed the noise from the given real noisy image by two sub-networks. One was in charge of estimating the noise of the real noisy image. The other was used to obtain latent clean image. For more complex corrupted images, a deep plug-and-play super-resolution (DPSR) BIB88524978 method was developed to estimate blur kernel and noise, and recover a high-resolution image. There were also other important researches have done in the field of image denoising in recent years, however, there was only few reviews to summarize the deep learning technique in image denoising BIB52965917 . Although Ref. BIB52965917 referred to a lot of work, it lacked more detailed classification information of deep learning for image denoising. To give an example, related work of unpaired real noisy images were not covered. To this end, we have a aim to provide a comprehensive overview of deep learning for image denoising both applications and method analysis. That referred to all tables and visual figures can make readers more quickly understand this filed. Finally, we empirically provide some discussion about the state-of-the-arts for image denoising, which can be further expanded to the challenges and potential research directions in the future. Outline of this survey is shown in Fig. 1 . This overview covers more than 200 papers about deep learning for image denoising in recent years. The main contributions in this paper can be summarized as follows. 1. The overview illustrates the effect of deep learning methods on the whole field of image denoising. 2. The overview summarizes the solutions of deep learning techniques for different types of noise (i.e. additive white noise, blind noise, real noise and hybrid noise) and analyzes the motivations and principles of these methods in image denoising. Finally, we evaluate the denoising