Due to plug-and-play network architectures, CNNs have obtained great success in image processing BIB49299682 BIB69631012 . As pioneers of CNNs, LeNet BIB14542261 used convolutional kernels of different sizes to extract features and obtain good performance in image classification. However, due to the activation function, Sigmoid, LeNet had a slow convergence speed, which was a shortcoming for real applications. After LeNet, the proposed AlexNet BIB207763512 was a milestone for deep learning. Its success had the following reasons. Firstly, graphics processing unit (GPU)  provided strong computational ability. Secondly, random clipping (i.e. dropout) can solve the overfitting problem. Thirdly, ReLU BIB15539264 can improve the speed of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) rather than Sigmoid BIB115963355 . Fourthly, data augmentation method can further address the overfitting problem. Although AlexNet has obtained good performance, it could result in high memory due to big convolutional kernels. That limited applications in the real world, such as smart cameras. After that, deeper network architectures with small filters were preferred to improve the performance and reduce computational costs from 2014 to 2016. Specifically, VGG BIB14124313 used stacked more convolutions with of small kernel size to win the ImageNet large scale visual recognition (LSVR) challenge 2014 via stacked more convolutions with of small kernels. To give an example, we use Fig. 3 to visually show the network architecture. On the top of deeper networks, increasing the width was very popular. GoogleNet BIB206592484 increased the width to improve the performance for image applications. Moreover, the GoogleNet transformed a big convolutional kernel into two small convolution kernels to reduce the number of parameters and computational cost. Additionally, the GoogLeNet used the inception module BIB16636683 as well as Inception 1. Its visual network figure was descripted in Fig. 4 .