In the real world, the captured images were affected by complex environments. Motivated by that, hybrid-noisy-image denoising techniques were proposed. Li et al. BIB4889032 proposed the combination of CNN and warped guidance to resolve the noise, blur, JPEG compression questions. Zhang et al. BIB2141622 used a model to deal with multiple degradations, such as noise, blur kernel and low-resolution image. To enhance the raw sensor data, Kokkinos et al. BIB84185621 presented residual CNN with iterative algorithm for image demosaicking and denoising. To handle arbitrary blur kernels, Zhang et al. BIB88524978 proposed to use cascaded deblurring and SISR networks to recover plug-and-play super-resolution image. These hybrid noisy image denoising methods are presented in Table 7 as follows. BIB996788 . The Set12 had 12 different scenes. The BSD68 had 68 different nature images. They were used to test the Gaussian denoiser, denoiser of blind noise. The color noisy image dataset included CBSD68, Kodak24  , McMaster BIB15614128 , cc BIB6253552 , DND BIB9715523 , NC12  , SIDD BIB52059988 and Nam BIB6253552 . The Kodak24 and McMaster contained 24 and 18 color noisy images, respectively. The cc was composed of 15 real noisy image of different ISO, i.e. 1,600, 3,200 and 6,400. The DND contained 50 real noisy image and the clean images were captured by low-ISO images. The NC12 had 12 noisy images and it did not ground-truth clean image. The SIDD was real noisy images from smart phones, which consisted of 320 image pairs of noisy and ground-truth images. The Nam included 11 different scenes, where was saved as the format of 'JPEG'.