Feature is used to represent the whole image in image processing, and it is important for machine learning  BIB209341663 BIB16554173 . However, deep learning technique is black box, and cannot choose features, which cannot guarantee obtained features are the most robust BIB6788781 BIB127261636 . Motivated by this reason, common feature extraction method embedded into CNN was conducted in image denoising. That can be divided into five categories: weak edge-information, non-linear, high dimensional and non-salient noisy images, and high computational costs. For weak edge-information noisy images, CNN with transformation domain method including Guan et al. BIB117728294 , Li et al. BIB57192427 , Liu et al. BIB29151865 , Latif et al. BIB65404725 and Yang et al. BIB29803791 was very popular to remove the noise. Specifically, in BIB29151865 , it used wavelet method and U-net to eliminate the gridding effect of dilated convolutions on enlarging receptive field for image restoration. For non-linear noisy images, CNN with kernel method was useful BIB31004998 BIB119109843 . These methods had three steps in general BIB4381469 . First step used CNN to extract features. Second step utilized kernel method to convert obtained non-linear features into linearity. Final step exploited the RL to construct the latent clean image. For high dimensional noisy images, the combination of CNN and dimensional reduction method were proposed BIB51875450  . For example, Khaw et al. BIB32822817 used CNN with principal component analysis (PCA) for image denoising. This had three phases. First phase used convolution operations to extract features. Second phase utilized the PCA to reduce the dimension of obtained features. Final phase employed convolutions to deal with obtained features from the PCA and reconstruct a clean image. For non-salient noisy images, signal processing idea can guide CNN to extract salient features BIB58005411 BIB70016579 BIB155090395  . Specifically, skip connection operation was a typically operation of signal processing BIB70016579 . For high computational cost tasks, CNN with nature of image was very effective to decrease complex  BIB71149784 BIB7983990 . For example, Ahn et al. BIB7983990 used CNN with NSS to filter the noise, where similar characteristics of the given noisy image can accelerate speed of extraction feature and reduce computational cost. More detailed information of these methods mentioned are summarized in Table 2 .