In this paper, we comparatively study and systematcially summarize different deep networks on image denoising. First, we show the basic frameworks of deep learning for image denoising. Then, deep learning techniques for different noisy tasks, including additive white noisy images, blind denoising, real noisy images and hybrid noisy images are presented. Next, for each category of different noisy tasks, we analyze the motivation and theory of denoising networks. Finally, we compare the denoising results, efficiency and visual effects of different networks on benchmark datasets and give the crossing comparisons among different types of image denoising methods with different types of noise. Further, some potential research points and challenges of deep learning in image denoising are offered. Over the past few years, Gaussian noisy image denoising techniques have obtained great success, where the Gaussian noise is regular. However, in the real world the noise is complex and irregular. Improving the hardware device to suppress the noise for capturing a high-quality image is very important. Also, the obtained image may be blurry, low-resolution and corrupted. Thus, how to effectively recover the latent clean image from the superposed noisy image is very critical. Additionally, using deep learning techniques to learn features need the ground truth. However, the obtained real noisy images do not have the ground truth. These challenges are very urgent to address for scholars in the future.