Due to insufficiency of real noisy images, additive white noisy images (AWNI) have been widely used to train the denoising model BIB18141673 . The AWNI includes Gaussian, Poisson, Salt, Pepper and multiplicative noisy images BIB110492839 . Moreover, there are a lot of deep learning techniques (i.e. CNN/NN, the combination of CNN/NN and common feature extraction methods and the combination of optimization method and CNN/NN) for AWNI denoising. It is known that denoising methods should be compared in the same standard. However, additive white noise include Gaussian, Poisson, low-light noise, salt and pepper noise with different noise levels has big difference. Also, different tools of different methods have influence on denoising results. For the reasons above, we choose typical Gaussian noise to test the denoising performance of different methods. Additionally, most of denoising methods use PSNR as quantitative index. Thus, we use the BSD68, Set12, CBSD68, Kodak24 and McMaster to test the denoising performance of deep learning techniques for additive white noisy-image denoising as follows. For quantitative analysis, Table 8 shows that PSNR values of different networks with different noise levels for gray additive white noisy image denoising. To test the ability of dealing with single gray additive white noisy image from different networks, the Set12 is used to conduct experiments as illustrated in Table 9 . Table 10 proves the denoising performance of different methods for color additive white noisy image denoising. Additionally, we use Table 11 to present the efficiency of different methods for image denoising. For qualitative analysis, we magnify one area in the latent clean image from different methods as observation. As shown Figs. 7-10, the observed area is clearer, the corresponding method has better denoising performance.