One reason of the success of deep learning is GPU. The GPU uses CUDA  , OpenCL BIB15226591 and Cudnn  to obtain stronger parallel computing ability, which exceeds 10-30 times than CPU in speed. The CPU consists of a NVIDIA consumer (i.e. GTX 680, GTX 980, GTX 1070, GTX 1070Ti, GTX1080, GTX 1080Ti, RTX 2070, RTX 2080 and RTX 2080Ti), NVIDIA (i.e. Tesla K40c, Tesla K80, Quadro M6000, Quadro GP100, Quadro P6000 and Tesla V100) and AMD (i.e. Radeon Vega 64 and FE) BIB76666497 . Another important factor of deep learning techniques is software. The software can provide some interfaces to call GPU and allow the users to implement functions, according to their demands. Further, the popular software packages are presented as follows: (1) Caffe BIB1799558 based on C++ is clear and efficient for deep learning. It provides C++, Python and Matlab interfaces, which can also run on both CPU and GPU, respectively. It is widely used for object detection task. However, the Caffe requires developers to master strong C++ basic knowledge. (2) Theano  is a compiler of math expressions to deal with large-scale neural networks. The Theano provides Python interface and it is used in image super-resolution, denoising and classification in general. (3) Matconvnet BIB207224096 offers Matlab interface. It is usually utilized in image classification, denoising and super-resolution, and video tracking. However, it requires users to expertly master Matlab. (4) Tensorflow BIB6287870 is relatively high-order machine learning libraries. It is also faster than Theano for compilation. The Tensorflow offers C++ and Python interfaces. It is suitable to object detection, image classification, denoising and super-resolution and so on. (5) Keras [36] based on Tensorflow and Theano is implemented by Python. The Keras offers Python interface. It can be applied in image classification, object detection, image resolution, image denoising and action recognition. (6) Pytorch  is implemented by Python. The Pytorch presents Python interface. Additionally, it is employed in image classification, object detection, image segment, action recognition, image super-resolution, image denoising and video tracking.