Filter concatenation Although VGG and GoogLeNet methods are effective for image applications, they are faced with the following drawbacks: (1) if network is very deep, this network may result in vanishing or exploding gradients. (2) If network is very wide, it may encounter overfitting phenomenon. For overcoming these problems, ResNet BIB206594692 was proposed in 2016. That is, each block was added residual learning operation in the ResNet to improve the performance of image recognition, which also won ImageNet LSVR 2015. Here we use Fig. 5 to visually show the idea of the residual learning. Since 2014, deep networks have been widely used in the fields of image application in real world. However, captured images of many applications, such as real noisy images are not enough, deep CNNs have poor performance of image applications. Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) BIB11758569 was developed based on this reason. The GAN had two networks: generative and discriminative networks. The generative network (also referred to as generator) is used to generate samples, according to input samples. The other network (also as well as discriminator) is used to judge truth of both input samples and generated samples. Two networks are adversarial. It is noted that if the discriminator can accurately distinguish real samples and generate samples from generator, the trained model is regarded to finishing. The network architecture of the GAN can be seen in Fig. 6 . Due to the strong ability of constructing supplement training samples, the GAN is very effective for small sample tasks, such as face recognition BIB21011865 and complex noisy image denoising BIB51989956 .