Neural networks are on the basis of machine learning methods, which are pioneer of deep learning techniques BIB11715509 . Most of neural networks comprise neurons, input X, activation function f , weights W = [W 0 , W 1 , ..., W n−1 ] and biases b = [b 0 , b 1 , ..., b n ]. The activation functions such as Sigmoid   and Tanh BIB206769720 BIB122178749 can convert the linear input into non-linearity through W and b as follows. f (X; It is noted that if the neural network has multiple layers, it is regarded as multilayer perceptron (MLP) BIB7572570 . Also, the middle layers are treated as hidden layers beside the input and output layers. This process can be expressed as where n is the final layer of the neural network. To make readers easier understand the neural network, we use a visual example to show the principle of the neural network as shown in Fig. 2 . The two-layer fully connected neural network includes two layers: hidden layer and output layer (input layer is not regarded as a layer of neural network in general). There are parameters to be defined: x 1 , x 2 , x 3 and o 1 represent inputs and output of this neural network, respectively. w 1 , w 2 , ..., w 11 , w 12 and b 1 , b 2 , b 3 , b 4 are the weights and biases, respectively. To give an example, output of one neuron h 1 via Eqs. (3) and (4) is obtained as follows: Input Layer Hidden Layer Output Layer  First, the output of the network o 1 is obtained. Then, the network uses back propagation (BP) BIB62696404 and loss function to learn parameters. That is, when the loss value is within specified limitation, the trained model is considered as well trained. It should be noted that if the number of the layers of a neural network is over 3, it is also referred to as a deep neural network. Specifically, stacked auto-encoder (SAR) BIB1658773 and deep belief network (DBN) BIB14201947  are typical deep neural networks. They used stacked layers in an unsupervised manner to train the models and obtain good performance. However, these networks were not simple to implement and need a lot of manual settings to achieve an optimal model. Owing to this reason, end-to-end connected networks, especially CNN, were proposed BIB51875020 . CNNs have wide applications in the field in image processing, especially image denoising, and they are presented in detail in next section.