Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 83 Filed 10/02/15 Page 1 of 8

1 KAMALA D. HARRIS, State Bar No. 146672 Attorney General of California
2 JENNIFER A. NEILL, State Bar No. 184697 Senior Assistant Attorney General
3 JESSICA N. BLONIEN, State Bar No. 189137 Supervising Deputy Attorney General
4 1300 I Street, Suite 125 P.O. Box 944255
5 Sacramento, CA 94244-2550 Telephone: (916) 327-3893
6 Fax: (916) 322-8288 E-mail: Jessica.Blonien@doj .ca.gov
7 Attorneys for Defendants Shaffer, Beard, Brown, Kusaj, Hayward, Powers, and Fulbright
8 KEITH WATTLEY, State Bar No. 203366
9 UnCommon Law 220 4111 Street, Suite 103
10 Oakland, CA 94607 Telephone: (510) 271-0310
11 Facsimile: (510) 271-0101 Email: Kwattley@uncommonlaw.org
12 Attorney for Sam Johnson and the Plaintiff Class
13

14 IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
15 FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA
16 SACRAMENTO DIVISION
17

18

19 SAM JOHNSON,

2:12-cv-01059-KJM

20

Plaintiff, AMENDED STIPULATED

SETTLEMENT

21

v.

Courtroom: 3

22 JENNIFER SHAFFER, et al.,

Judge:

The Hon. Kimberly Mueller

Action Filed: April20, 2012

23

Defendants.

24

25

26

The parties enter into this Settlement to address Plaintiffs' claims regarding the Board of

27 Parole Hearings' (Board) forensic assessment protocols and to settle this case.

28 1
Am. Stip. Settlement (2:12-cv-01059-KJM)

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 83 Filed 10/02/15 Page 2 of 8

1

The Plaintiffs are prisoner Sam Johnson and a certified class consisting of California state

2 prisoners who are serving life sentences and are eligible for parole consideration after having

3 served their minimum terms. The Defendants include the Executive Officer of the Board, Chief

4 Psychologist of the Board, a Board Psychologist, the Secretary of the California Department of

5 Corrections and Rehabilitation, and California Governor Edmund G. Brown Jr., who are sued in

6 their official capacities as state officials.

7

The action was originally filed on April20, 2012. After the original Complaint was

8 dismissed, an Amended Complaint was filed on November 15, 2012. The Court certified the case

9 as a class action on March 31, 2014, and has granted partial summary judgment in favor of

10 Defendants -as to claims four, five, nine and twelve in the First Amended Complaint. All other

11 claims in the Amended Complaint remain. There have been two discovery periods, the first

12 closing before the class was certified. Discovery was reopened, beginning with the exchange of

13 initial disclosures in August 2014. The parties then conducted additional discovery, which

14 included depositions of Board officials, and Board psychologists involved in the forensic

15 assessment protocols and parole process, and disclosure of training materials, reports and other

16 documents.

17

The parties have conducted extensive negotiations over several months to resolve Plaintiffs'

18 demands concerning Board protocols used in comprehensive risk assessments prepared in

19 anticipation of parole consideration hearings. Those negotiations have been undertaken at arms'

20 length and in good faith between Plaintiffs' counsel, Defendants' counsel and Defendant Jennifer

21 Shaffer, Executive Officer of the Board. As a result of settlement negotiations the Board

22 commenced reforming the forensic assessment protocols. The parties have reached agreement on

23 changes to Defendants' forensic assessment protocols to settle Plaintiffs' claims for declaratory

24 and injunctive relief. The parties freely, voluntarily, and knowingly, with the advice of counsel,

25 enter into this Settlement for that purpose.

26

All parties and their counsel recognize that, in the absence of an approved settlement, they

27 face lengthy and substantial litigation, including trial and potential appellate proceedings, all of

28 which will consume time and resources and present the parties with ongoing litigation risks and 2
Am. Stip. Settlement (2:12-cv-01059-KJM)

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 83 Filed 10/02/15 Page 3 of 8

1 uncertainties. The parties wish to avoid these risks, uncertainties, and consumption of time and

2 resources through the terms and conditions of this Settlement.

3

ACCORDINGLY, without any admission or concession by Defendants of any past or

4 present and ongoing violations of a federal right, all claims in the First Amended Complaint shall

5 be finally and fully compromised, settled, and released, subject to the terms and conditions of this

6 Settlement, which the parties enter into freely, voluntarily, knowingly, and with the advice of

7 counsel.

8

A. JURISDICTION AND VENUE

9

The Court has jurisdiction over this matter under 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331 and 1343. Venue is

10 proper under 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b) because a substantial part ofthe events giving rise to Plaintiffs'

11 claims occurred in the Eastern District of California.

12

B. CLASS CERTIFICATION

13

On March 31, 2014, the Court certified a class consisting of California state prisoners who

14 are serving life sentences and are eligible for parole consideration after having served their

15 minimum terms.

16

C. TERMS AND CONDITIONS

17

1. Consistent with the terms negotiated with Plaintiffs, the Board of Parole Hearings

18 submitted a Budget Change Proposal for additional funding to administer Comprehensive Risk

19 Assessments (CRAs) every three years. The budget change was approved. As such, the Board

20 will begin preparing new CRAs every three years for hearings scheduled to occur on or after June

21 1, 2016, if the CRA is older than three years. For hearings advanced as a result of a petition to

22 advance or the Board's administrative review process under Penal Code section 3041.5 (b)(4) or

23 (d)( 1), a new CRA will be conducted if the prisoner's most recent CRA is more than three years

24 old at the time of the advanced hearing; if the most recent CRA is less than three years old at the

25 time of the advanced hearing, a new CRA will not be completed. The Board will revise its

26 regulations to reflect this process.

27

2. Before the regulatory change in Paragraph 1 is submitted to the Office of

28 Administrative Law (OAL), the Board will provide class counsel with a draft of the proposed 3

Am. Stip. Settlement (2:12-cv-01059-KJM)

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 83 Filed 10/02/15 Page 4 of 8

1 regulation. Class counsel shall have thirty days to review the draft and provide written comments 2 and suggestions to the Board, The Board will provide a written response to class counsel's 3 written comments within thirty days. When the proposed regulation is presented to the Board's 4 commissioners for review and a vote, class counsel may submit additional comments and 5 suggestions through the Board's public comment process. Once the regulation is submitted to the 6 OAL, class cotmsel may again submit additional comments and suggestions through the OAL

7 public comment process.

8

3. In accordance with Paragraph 1, the Board will no longer conduct Subsequent Risk

9 Assessments.

10

4. If, before December 31, 2016, the Board proposes any changes in how or whether the

11 CRA, including the HCR-20 Version 3, PCL-R, or Static 99-R will be administered, or proposes

12 using a risk-assessment tool other than the HCR-20 Version 3, PCL-R, and Static 99-R, class

13 counsel may present an expert to discuss the proposed changes to the Board's commissioners in

14 open session. The expert will be allowed to speak and answer questions for up to two hours. The

15 expert must have experience with the use of risk assessments in a correctional setting.

16

5. The Board's Chief Psychologist will again provide a presentation to the Board's

17 commissioners in open session regarding the recidivism rates for long-term offenders. The

18 information presented to the commissioners will be provided in a text document and made 19 available to class members through class counsel, on the Board's web site

20 (www.cdcr.ca.gov/BOPH), and will be emailed to all attorneys on file with the Board who are

21 currently representing life prisoners.

22

6. The Board's Chief Psychologist will again provide a presentation to the Board's

23 commissioners ,in open session regarding when and how the Board uses the Static 99-R, a risk/
24 assessment tool used to predict an offender's risk of sexual recidivism. this presentation will

25 include a discussion of how the Static 99-R accounts for an offender's age and other factors that 26 can change over time. The information presented to the commissioners will be provided in a text . 27 document and made available to class members through class counsel, on the Board's web site

28 4
Am. Stip. Settlement (2:12-cv-01059-KJM)

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 83 Filed 10/02/15 Page 5 of 8

1 (www.cdcr.ca.gov/BOPI-I), and will be emailed to all attorneys on file with the Board who are

2 currently representing life prisoners.

3

7. The Board will formalize a process for prisoners or their counsel to lodge timely

4 written objections asserting factual errors in a CRA (to be defined in the regulations) before their

5 parole consideration hearing occurs. If the Board receives a timely written objection in advance

6 of a parole hearing, the Board will provide a written response within a reasonable period of time.

7 The Board will submit draft regulations to reflect this process to the OAL by July 1, 2016.

8

8. Before the regulatory change in Paragraph 7 is submitted to the OAL, the Board will

9 provide class counsel with a draft of the proposed regulation. Class counsel shall have thirty days

10 to review the draft and provide written comments and suggestions to the Board. The Board will

11 provide a written response to class counsel's written comments within thirty days. Class counsel

12 will have additional opportunities to provide comments during the Board's and OAL's regular

13 public comment periods.

14

9. When the Static 99-R is used, the CRA will inform the reader that the Static 99-R

15 score alone generally does not assess dynamic characteristics that may mitigate or elevate a

16 prisoner's risk.

17

10. All future CRAs will clarify that the Overall Risk Rating is relative to other life

18 prisoners.

19

11. CRAs will inform the reader of the report that, generally speaking, the current

20 recidivism rates for long term offenders are lower than those of other prisoners released from

21 shorter sentences.

22

12. Plaintiffs will promptly dismiss all Defendants from this action except Defendant

23 Jennifer Shaffer, the Board's Executive Officer.

24

D. TERMINATION OF CASE

25

13. The Court will retainjurisdiction over this case until January 1, 2017.

26

14. If within 30 days after January 1, 2017, Plaintiffs believe that Defendants have not

27 submitted regulations to the OAL, completed the agreed upon presentations to the Board, and

28 provided language to Board psychologists with instructions to include it in CRAs, Plaintiffs may 5
Am. Stip. Settlement (2:12-cv-01059-KJM)

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 83 Filed 10/02/15 Page 6 of 8

1 seek an extension of the Court's jurisdiction over this matter for a period not to exceed 12

2 months. To receive an extension of the Court's jurisdiction, Plaintiffs must demonstrate by a

3 preponderance of the evidence that Defendants have not materially complied with the terms of

4 this agreement. Defendants shall have an opportunity to respond to Plaintiffs' request and present

5 their own evidence. If Plaintiffs do not seek an extension of the Court's jurisdiction within the

6 period noted above, or the Court denies Plaintiffs' request for an extension, this agreement and

7 the Court's jurisdiction shall automatically terminate, and the claims in this case shall be

8 dismissed with prejudice.

9

15. It is the intention of the parties in signing this Settlement that upon completion of its

10 terms it shall be effective as a full and final release from all claims asserted in the First Amended

11 Complaint.

12

E. JOINT MOTION AND STAY OF PROCEEDINGS

13

The parties will jointly request that the Court preliminarily approve this Settlement, require

14 that notice of the proposed settlement be sent to the class, and schedule a fairness hearing. The

15 parties will also file a proposed order granting preliminary approval of this Settlement. With this

16 Motion the Parties will also jointly request that the Court stay all other proceedings in this case

17 pending resolution of the fairness hearing. Following the close of the objection period, the Parties

18 will jointly request that the Court enter a final order containing all of the elements included in a

19 proposed order, approving this Settlement, retaining jurisdiction to enforce it, and continuing the

20 stay of the case pending the completion of this Settlement's terms.

21

F. ATTORNEYS' FEES

22

Defendants agree to pay Plaintiffs' counsel attorney's fees for work reasonably performed

23 on this case until preliminary approval of this Settlement at the hourly rate set forth under the

24 Prison Litigation Reform Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1997e(d). Plaintiffs shall have sixty days from the

25 entry of a preliminary order approving this Settlement to file their motion for attorneys' fees for

26 work reasonably performed before preliminary approval of this settlement. Defendants will not

27 oppose a motion for reasonable attorney's fees and costs that does not exceed $120,000.

28 6
Am. Stip. Settlement (2:12-cv-01059-KJM)

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 83 Filed 10/02/15 Page 7 of 8

1

The notice to the class members shall explain that Plaintiffs will file a motion for attorneys'

2 fees following entry of a preliminary order approving this Settlement.

3

G. CONSTRUCTION OF SETTLEMENT

4

This Settlement reflects the entire agreement of the parties and supersedes any prior written

5 or oral agreements between them. No extrinsic evidence whatsoever may be introduced in any

6 judicial proceeding to provide the meaning or construction of this Settlement. Any modification

7 to the terms of this Settlement must be in writing and signed by a Board representative and

8 attorneys for Plaintiffs and Defendants to be effective or enforceable.

9

This Settlement shall be governed and construed according to California law. The parties

10 waive any common-law or statutory rule of construction that ambiguity should be construed

11 against the drafter of this Settlement, and agree that the language in all parts of this Settlement

12 shall in all cases be construed as a whole, according to its fair meaning.

13

This Settlement shall be valid and binding on, and faithfully kept, observed, performed, and

14 be enforceable by and against the parties, their successors and assigns.

15 Ill 16 Ill 17 Ill 18 Ill 19 Ill 20 Ill 21 Ill 22 Ill 23 Ill 24 Ill 25 Ill 26 Ill 27 Ill

28 7
Am. Stip. Settlement (2:12-cv-01059-KJM)

From:Four

PCoainstes 2S:a1n2-Rcavfa-0el1059-KJM-TAoC:191D63o2c28u2m88ent 83

10/02/2015 15:33 #095 P.001/001 Filed 10/02/15 Page 8 of 8

1

The obligations governed by this Settlement am severable, If for any reason a part of this

2 , Settltment is determined to be invalid or unenforceable, such a determination shall not affect the

3 remainder.

4

The waiver by one party of any provision or breach of this Settlement shall not ~ deemed a

s waiver of any other provision or breach of this Settlement

6 IT IS SO STIPULATED.

7
2, 8 Dated: October 2015

9

10

11
12 Dated; October l , 2015

13

14

15

16

' ,.,

b 17 Dated: October 2015

18

19

20
SA2013310229
21 322001 J3.docx

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

/
Jennifer Shaffer, Chief Executive Officer Board of Parole Hearings
~~-
Su "' rvising Deputy Attorney General Attorneys for Defendants Shaffer. Cate, Brown, Kusaj, Hayward. Powers, and Fulbright Kamala D.Harris Attorney General of California
(£~
Keith Wattley UnCommon Law Attorneysfor PlaintU]'Sam Johnson and the Plaintiff Class
8
Am. Stip. Settlement (2:12-cv-01059-KJM)

