Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 1 of 26

1 KEITH WATTLEY, SBN 203366

2

UnCommon Law 220 4th Street, Suite 103

3 Oakland, CA 94607

4

Telephone: (510) 271-0310 Facsimile: (510) 271-0101

5 Email: kwattley@theuncommonlaw.com

6 Attorney for Plaintiff 7

8 UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
9 EASTERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA
10

11

12

13 SAM JOHNSON,

14

Plaintiff,

15 v.
16

17 JENNIFER SHAFFER,

18

Defendant

19

) ) Case No.: ) ) CIVIL COMPLAINT FOR ) DECLARATORY AND ) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF ) ) ) )

20

INTRODUCTION

21 1. This is a civil rights complaint by state prisoner Sam Johnson seeking
22

23 declaratory and injunctive relief under constitutional, statutory and regulatory law against

24 officials of the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) and its
25 Board of Parole Hearings (BPH) for applying unlawful procedures to consider his
26
27 suitability for parole.

28

1
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 2 of 26

1

JURISDICTION AND VENUE

2

2. Plaintiff brings this action to redress the deprivation of rights secured to him

3 by the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. This action also arises 4 5 under Section 7 of Article 1 of the California Constitution, as well as the statutory and

6 regulatory law of the State of California.

7

3. This Court has jurisdiction over this matter pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331

8

and 1343, and 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The United States Supreme Court has expressly held that 9

10 prisoners challenging parole consideration procedures may bring suit in federal court under

11 § 1983. Wilkinson v. Dotson, 544 U.S. 74 (2005). This Court also has supplemental

12 jurisdiction over Plaintiff’s state law claims pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1367.
13

14

4. Venue is proper in this judicial district under 28 U.S.C. § 1391 because the

15 defendants are employed in the County of Sacramento, which is in this judicial district.

16 THE PARTIES
17

18

A. Plaintiff

19

5. Sam Johnson (“Johnson”) is a prisoner incarcerated at San Quentin State

20 Prison. He is serving a sentence of 25 years to life, plus four years, following his 1991
21
22 conviction for first degree murder, robbery and assault. He has always maintained his

23 innocence of these crimes.

24 B. Defendants

25

26

6. Defendant JENNIFER SHAFFER (“Shaffer”) is the Executive Officer of the

27 Board of Parole Hearings (“BPH”). As the administrative head of the agency, she is

28

2
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 3 of 26

1 responsible for the day-to-day operations of the BPH, including oversight and supervision

2 of its Forensic Assessment Division. She is sued in her official capacity only.

3

7. Defendant MATTHEW CATE (“CATE”) is the Secretary of the California

4

5 Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (“CDCR”), the umbrella organization under

6 which the BPH was formed.

7

8. Defendant EDMUND G. (JERRY) BROWN, Jr. is Governor of the State of

8

California and the Chief Executive of the state government. He is sued in his official 9

10 capacity. As Governor, Mr. Brown is responsible for the appointment of Defendant

11 Secretary of the CDCR and, subject to State Senate confirmation, every Commissioner of 12
the Board of Parole Hearings (“BPH”). The Governor also appointed the Defendant 13
14 Executive Officer of the BPH. The Governor, in union with those whom he appoints, and

15 by and through those persons employed by the other defendants, controls and regulates

16 plaintiff’s custody.
17

18

9. Defendant CLIFF KUSAJ, Psy. D., (“KUSAJ”) is the head of the BPH’s

19 Forensic Assessment Division (“FAD”), through which BPH prepares psychological
20 evaluations and risk assessments for consideration by BPH Commissioners in determining
21 22 prisoners’ suitability for parole.

23

10. Defendant RICHARD HAYWARD, Ph.D., (“HAYWARD”) is a

24 psychologist employed by the FAD. Dr. Hayward authored the report utilized to deny 25 26 Plaintiff parole at his April 21, 2010, parole hearing.

27

28

3
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 4 of 26

1

11. Defendant THOMAS POWERS (“POWERS”) is or was at some time

2 relevant to this complaint a Commissioner of the Board of Parole Hearings. As a

3 Commissioner, Defendant Powers is responsible for the operation and policy making of the 4 5 BPH and he presides or presided over hearings to determine whether to release prisoners on

6 parole. Defendant Powers presided over Plaintiff’s parole hearing on April 21, 2010.

7

12. Defendant AL FULBRIGHT (“FULBRIGHT”) is or was at some time

8

relevant to this complaint a Deputy Commissioner of the Board of Parole Hearings. 9

10 Defendant Fulbright presided along with Defendant Powers at Plaintiff’s parole hearing on

11 April 21, 2010. 12
13. Plaintiff is informed and believes, and on that basis alleges, that at all times 13
14 mentioned in this complaint each individual Defendant was acting under color of state law.

15

STATEMENT OF THE FACTS

16 14. The BPH is charged with determining whether and when indeterminately-
17

18 sentenced prisoners (“Lifers”) in California are suitable to be released on parole. The BPH

19 is responsible for promulgating rules, policies and regulations to effectuate the statutory
20 mandate to normally grant parole to Lifers when they first become eligible for parole. Cal.
21 22 Penal Code, § 3041. BPH is required to grant parole as long as the Lifer being considered

23 does not present an unreasonable risk to public safety. BPH and its predecessor entities

24 have established regulations setting forth the criteria to be considered in determining a 25 26 prisoner’s suitability for release on parole. Included within those regulations are

27

28

4
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 5 of 26

1 procedures requiring psychological evaluations to be conducted and reported by the FAD.

2 Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, § 2240.

3

15. BPH actually established the FAD in 2006, long before BPH attempted to

4

5 promulgate regulations that might authorize such action. Furthermore, when BPH did

6 attempt to promulgate such regulations, it did so by providing false and misleading

7 statements to the state agency responsible for certifying compliance with applicable
8 rulemaking procedures. In the period since 2006, including in connection with Plaintiff’s
9

10 parole consideration hearing in April 2010, BPH has established a pattern or practice of

11 utilizing the FAD to prejudice BPH commissioners against granting parole to eligible

12 prisoners.
13

14

16. Plaintiff’s Comprehensive Risk Assessment (“CRA”) was conducted by FAD

15 psychologist Richard Hayward, Ph. D., in February 2009. This CRA provides
16 approximately three pages of single-spaced, detailed history covering Plaintiff’s childhood
17
18 and adolescence, family history, education, development, relationships, leisure activities,

19 employment history, and post-parole plans – all of which appear void of any significant red
20 flags. Next, the clinical assessment section reviewed Plaintiff’s mental health, medical, and
21 22 substance use history – again, all of which appear void of significant problems. The

23 evaluator stated that Plaintiff was “cooperative” during the interview, that he “displayed a

24 full range of affect,” that his mood was “neutral,” and that there were “no signs of any 25 26 thought disturbances.”

27

28

5
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 6 of 26

1

17. Surprisingly, Dr. Hayward diagnosed Plaintiff as having Antisocial

2 Personality Disorder – an Axis II disorder within the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of

3 Mental Disorders (“DSM-IV-TR”). Dr. Hayward stated that the disorder was attributable 4 5 “to the committing offense, the history of community offenses and arrests and the rule

6 violations noted.” However, reviewing Section 301.70 of the DSM-IV-TR, it does not

7 appear that Plaintiff meets most of the diagnostic criteria.
8 18. Dr. Hayward also utilized the three risk assessment tools currently employed
9

10 by the FAD to project Lifers’ risk to the public. According to Dr. Hayward, Plaintiff’s

11 score on the Psychopathy Checklist-Revised (PCL-R) placed him in the “higher range of 12
the clinical construct of psychopathy when compared to other male offenders” – 13
14 specifically, higher than fifty-seven percent of those offenders assessed using this

15 instrument. Similarly, Dr. Hayward claimed that Plaintiff’s scores on the 20-item
16 Historical, Clinical, Risk Management tool (HCR-20) placed him in the “high range for
17
18 violent recidivism,” and the Level of Service/Case Management Inventory (LS/CMI)

19 placed him in the “high category,” above thirty-three percent of “the North American

20 sample of incarcerated male offenders.”
21

22

19. Plaintiff and his attorney made numerous attempts to address and correct Dr.

23 Hayward’s report because it contained numerous conclusions that were either unsupported

24 by the record or directly contrary to other statements in the report itself. Plaintiff’s counsel 25 26 wrote to the BPH more than two months before the April 2010 hearing, raising nine

27 separate substantial errors Dr. Hayward made. Among those errors were the following:

28

6
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 7 of 26

1

a. Dr. Hayward’s report claimed a “substantial history of impaired impulse

2

control,” “impaired behavioral control,” and “negative attitudes.” However,

3

Plaintiff had no history of violence, no juvenile record and only three

4

5

misdemeanor convictions prior to the commitment offense. He maintained

6

steady employment (including strong leadership positions) both prior to and

7

throughout his nineteen years of incarceration. His sole rule violation report

8

in prison was six years prior to the hearing and was categorized as only a 9

10

Division “F” offense.

11

b. Although Dr. Hayward acknowledged that Plaintiff has no mental illness, has

12 never received mental health treatment in prison and has no history of any
13

14

problems with drugs or alcohol, he nevertheless concluded there was

15

evidence of “a lack of responsiveness to treatment” that increased Plaintiff’s

16 risk to the public if released.
17

18

c. Dr. Hayward claimed that Plaintiff “had significant problems with previous

19

violence, psychopathy (sic) and Antisocial Personality Disorder” prior to the

20 commitment offense, none of which is true.
21

22

d. Dr. Hayward relied on the following factors in determining that Plaintiff

23

scored in the higher range on the PCLR: “Superficial Charm, Pathological

24

Lying, Shallow Affect, Poor Behavioral Controls, Impulsivity,

25

26

Irresponsibility.” However, there was no evidence anywhere in the

27

28

7
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 8 of 26

1

assessment supporting a finding that Plaintiff is a pathological liar, nor is

2

there evidence that he has poor behavior control.

3

e. In discussing the Clinical, or more dynamic, aspects of the HCR-20, Dr.

4

5

Hayward generically asserted that there was evidence of “a lack of insight,

6

negative attitudes, impulsivity and lack of responsiveness to treatment.” Yet,

7

nowhere did Dr. Hayward explain any evidentiary basis for this substantial

8

finding. 9

10

f. The assessment stated that Plaintiff’s parole plans indicated problems in the

11

area of personal support and compliance with remediation attempts. Yet, Dr.

12 Hayward found “generally feasible” Plaintiff’s plans to live with his wife and
13

14

children and to seek a job in the restaurant industry where he was

15

successfully employed for roughly 15 years prior to his incarceration. These

16 contradictory statements were never reconciled.
17

18

g. Factors that purportedly increased Plaintiff’s risk of recidivism were a

19

“reduced level of pro-social family support, a reduced level of constructive

20 leisure activities, associations with criminally oriented companions, a pro-
21

22

criminal orientation and an antisocial pattern.” However, these statements

23

directly contradict the findings elsewhere in the report that Plaintiff maintains

24

a positive relationship with his two surviving family members and his wife’s

25

26

family, is married to the mother of two of his children, has completed his

27

Associate’s Degree in prison and is chair of the Men’s Advisory Council.

28

8
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 9 of 26

1

h. There were multiple instances in the assessment where Dr. Hayward relied on

2

a claimed lack of remorse and/or insight into the commitment offense as a

3

factor demonstrating an increased risk to public safety if released. These

4

5

statements were based on the fact that Plaintiff has always steadfastly

6

maintained that he is innocent of this crime. However, Defendants are

7

prohibited from finding unsuitability based on a prisoner’s refusal to admit

8

guilt (see Penal Code section 5011 and Section 2236 of Title 15 of the 9

10

California Code of Regulations). More importantly, Plaintiff has expressed

11

deep and sincere remorse for his role in the events that lead up to the

12 commitment offense.
13

14

i. The assessment contains no legitimate explanation or information regarding

15

Dr. Hayward’s methodology in evaluating Plaintiff’s risk to the public if

16 paroled. Dr. Hayward states: “Ultimately, whether an inmate will engage in
17

18

future violence is a function of a variety of factors that include history,

19

personal disposition, and situational variables. The evaluator has taken these

20 factors into consideration in determining how much weight to allot to each of
21

22

the measures and in formulating an overall estimate of risk.” Unfortunately,

23

from this the Board was unable to determine which of the many factors relied

24

on by Dr. Hayward – many of which were invalid or unsupported by the facts

25

26

– were used to determine Plaintiff’s level of risk. In light of the fact that the

27

findings and assessment in this report are so far at odds with the prior

28

9
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 10 of 26

1

psychological report for Plaintiff, the findings in this report required

2

considerable explanation.

3

20. The FAD’s psychological protocol required the Board to conduct a new

4

5 evaluation if Dr. Hayward’s report contained even one substantial error. Yet, the BPH

6 responded to Plaintiff in March 2010, refusing to remove Dr. Hayward’s report and finding

7 no administrative or substantive errors in the report even though Plaintiff identified nine
8 separate substantial errors. Ironically, the hearing panel actually agreed with Plaintiff that
9

10 Dr. Hayward’s report contained some substantial errors, yet the panel still relied on the

11 report to deny Plaintiff parole. 12
21. Since BPH now requires the FAD to conduct a psychological evaluation 13
14 and/or risk assessment prior to every single parole consideration hearing, all Life prisoners

15 are directly impacted by these unlawful patterns and practices once they are eligible for

16 parole consideration.
17

18

22. Defendants failed to alert the April 2010 hearing panel to the controversy

19 regarding Dr. Hayward’s psychological evaluation despite the exchange of correspondence
20 during the two months leading up to the scheduled hearing. In fact, presiding
21 22 commissioner Powers had never even seen Plaintiff’s February 19, 2010 letter highlighting

23 the nine substantial errors in the evaluation until Plaintiff’s counsel provided him with a

24 copy of it after the hearing had already begun.

25

26

23. Despite the provisions in California Penal Code Section 2081.5 and

27 California Government Code § 11181, subdivisions (e) and (f), which direct Defendants to

28

10
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 11 of 26

1 make psychological evaluators available for questioning in parole consideration hearings,

2 Plaintiff is informed and believes that Defendants never grant requests that such evaluators

3 appear and testify in parole consideration hearings. Defendants failed to even respond to 4 5 Plaintiff’s request prior to and during his April 2010 hearing.

6

24. Defendants denied Plaintiff’s counsel’s request for the raw data and risk

7 assessment scores that purportedly supported Dr. Hayward’s findings.
8 25. Defendant’s April 2010 parole decision became final on August 19, 2010.
9

10 Plaintiff is due to have his subsequent parole consideration hearing no later than April 21,

11 2013. 12
26. As long as the challenged report remains in Plaintiff’s prison file, Defendants 13
14 will continue to rely on it at Plaintiff’s next parole consideration hearing and all future

15 hearings unless and until he is released on parole, regardless of whether subsequent risk

16 assessments are conducted and reported.
17

18

27. Defendants refuse to record and transcribe meetings between FAD

19 psychologists and the prisoners they evaluate, even though such meetings are not
20 confidential and such recordings and transcripts would easily resolve the majority of
21 22 disputes raised regarding statements recorded in the written reports.

23

28. Defendants’ policies, practices, conduct, and acts alleged herein have resulted

24 and will continue to result in irreparable injury to Plaintiff, including but not limited to 25 26 violations of his constitutional rights. Plaintiff has no plain, adequate or complete remedy at

27

28

11
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 12 of 26

1 law to address the wrongs described herein. Defendants will continue to conduct

2 unconstitutional parole consideration hearings unless enjoined by this Court.

3

29. An actual controversy exists between Plaintiff and Defendants in that Plaintiff

4

5 contends that the policies, practices and conduct of Defendants alleged herein are unlawful

6 and unconstitutional, whereas Plaintiff is informed and believes that Defendants contend

7 that said policies, practices and conduct are lawful and constitutional. Plaintiff seeks a
8 declaration of rights with respect to this controversy.
9

10

30. Injunctive relief including but not limited to an order enjoining Defendants’

11 policies, practices, regulations, actions and omissions such as are alleged herein, and 12
requiring the repeal or reformation of Defendants’ policies, practices, regulations, actions 13
14 or omissions so as to prevent their impermissible effect, is therefore appropriate and

15 necessary to avoid irreparable harm to Plaintiff and to effectuate the purpose of the United
16 States and California Constitutions and the other statutes and laws referenced herein as the
17
18 subject of Plaintiffs’ claims for relief.

19

FIRST CAUSE OF ACTION

20 31. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 30 of
21
22 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.

23

32. California’s parole scheme creates for Plaintiff a constitutionally protected

24 liberty interest in being released on parole.

25

26

33. Defendants are utilizing invalid tools and inadequate or improper training to

27 produce impermissibly elevated assessments for Plaintiff and others like him. Defendants

28

12
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 13 of 26

1 utilize the Psychopathy Checklist – Revised (PCL-R), the 20-item Historical, Clinical, Risk

2 Management Test (HCR-20) and the Level of Service, Case Management Inventory

3 (LS/CMI). However, none of these risk-assessment tools have been found to be valid 4 5 predictors of future violence for a population akin to California’s Lifers. Furthermore,

6 most psychological and criminal justice experts – including the majority of the expert panel

7 Defendants convened to consider the question, and including the author of one of the
8 principal tools himself – agree that these instruments are not valid predictors of future
9

10 violence for this population. Nevertheless, Defendants utilized these tools in Plaintiff’s

11 parole hearing, as they have in most hearings conducted since 2006 and nearly all hearings

12 held since January 2009.
13

14

34. Reliance on evidence lacking sufficient indicia of reliability to establish

15 Plaintiff’s risk to public safety violates his right to due process under the Fourteenth

16 Amendment.
17

18

SECOND CAUSE OF ACTION

19

35. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 34 of

20 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.
21

22

36. In their efforts to justify the development of the FAD and its use of the

23 current psychological evaluation methodology and tools, Defendants made numerous false

24 and misleading statements to the public and to the California Office of Administrative Law 25 26 regarding the process for establishing the FAD and selecting the three risk assessment tools

27 currently being utilized by the FAD to predict risk. For example, they falsely claimed a

28

13
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 14 of 26

1 consensus among an expert panel Defendants convened to consider the use of various risk

2 assessment tools, and they falsely cited a court mandate to establish the FAD and select the

3 invalid tools.

4

5

37. Defendants’ misconduct and reliance on invalid instruments violated

6 Plaintiff’s right to due process under the Fourteenth Amendment.

7

THIRD CAUSE OF ACTION

8

38. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 37 of 9

10 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.

11

39. Any respectable process through which written reports are considered in a

12 manner that impacts a person’s liberty interest must also provide a mechanism for
13

14 correcting errors in those reports so as not to unjustly harm the subject of the report. Here,

15 the protocol and subsequent regulation Defendants developed establishing the FAD and its
16 methodology require the removal or correction of FAD psychological reports when they
17
18 contain at least one substantial error or at least three administrative errors. However,

19 Defendants refused to remove or in any way correct Dr. Hayward’s report even though it

20 contained nine substantial errors – some of which Defendants even acknowledged.
21

22

40. Defendants’ reliance on evidence lacking sufficient indicia of reliability to

23 establish Plaintiff’s risk to public safety violates his right to due process under the

24 Fourteenth Amendment. 25

26

27

28

14
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 15 of 26

1

FOURTH CAUSE OF ACTION

2

41. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 40 of

3 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.

4

5

42. At a minimum, California Lifers have a constitutional right to notice of the

6 evidence being used to consider their suitability for parole. While Defendants provided

7 Plaintiff with Dr. Hayward’s report, they refused his request for the raw data and
8 underlying scores Defendants claim supported the statements in the report. They also did
9

10 not provide Plaintiff or his counsel with any recording, transcript or other notes from his

11 interview with Dr. Hayward. Dr. Hayward’s report may only be considered by Defendants 12
to evaluate Plaintiff’s suitability for parole if the report’s contents are both relevant and 13
14 reliable. However, Plaintiff has absolutely no way to evaluate the relevance and reliability

15 of Dr. Hayward’s conclusions without access to the raw data and underlying scores from
16 his evaluation. Indeed, this raw data is the actual evidence that either supports or does not
17
18 support the ultimate conclusion of whether Plaintiff presents a current risk to the public.

19

43. Defendants’ refusal to provide the underlying data they claim supported Dr.

20 Hayward’s conclusions deprived Plaintiff of due process.
21

22

FIFTH CAUSE OF ACTION

23

44. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 43 of

24 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.

25

26

45. At a minimum, California Lifers have a constitutional right to have an

27 opportunity to be heard during their parole consideration hearings. Defendants’ refusal to

28

15
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 16 of 26

1 provide Plaintiff with the raw data underlying Dr. Hayward’s report deprived him of the

2 knowledge of all the information to which he needed to respond to protect his rights. For

3 example, without the basis for Dr. Hayward’s conclusions, Plaintiff was unable to address 4 5 the new diagnosis of Antisocial Personality Disorder or the claims of impulsivity or failure

6 to benefit from treatment. Indeed, none of these claims had ever before been made in

7 Plaintiff’s life, so their basis at this time remains a complete mystery.
8 46. Defendants’ unfounded diagnosis of Antisocial Personality Disorder here is
9

10 consistent with its practice of over-diagnosing the alleged disorder using these risk

11 assessment tools, even though a large number of prisoners, like Plaintiff, do not meet the

12 diagnostic criteria.
13

14

47. Defendants’ refusal to provide the underlying data they claim supported Dr.

15 Hayward’s conclusions deprived Plaintiff of his right to be heard and therefore violated due

16 process.
17

18

SIXTH CAUSE OF ACTION

19

48. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 47 of

20 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.
21

22

49. Defendants refuse to record and transcribe psychological interviews between

23 FAD clinicians and prisoners, even though the meetings are not confidential and such

24 recordings or transcripts would instantly resolve the frequent disputes regarding whether 25 26 certain statements were or were not made during these meetings. Here, a recording or

27 transcript of Plaintiff’s meeting with Dr. Hayward would reveal whether or not there was

28

16
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 17 of 26

1 any basis for the conclusions Dr. Hayward made that were completely at odds with prior

2 reports and with everything else in Plaintiff’s file. Absent such recordings or transcripts,

3 the FAD reports are unreliable.

4

5

50. Defendants’ reliance on evidence lacking sufficient indicia of reliability to

6 establish Plaintiff’s risk to public safety violates his right to due process.

7

SEVENTH CAUSE OF ACTION

8

51. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 50 of 9

10 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.

11

52. At least two of the risk assessment tools Defendants utilize as part of FAD’s

12 psychological evaluation process – the PCL-R and the LS/CMI – yield percentile rankings
13

14 that compare the subject of the evaluation to a sample of other incarcerated persons, though

15 typically the sample is comprised of inmates with mental disorders. In their reports, FAD
16 clinicians interpret these rankings as falling within either the low, moderate or high risk
17
18 categories, although sometimes the categories are combined to produce low/moderate,

19 moderate/high or some similar combination. However, there are no standards used by the
20 FAD in distinguishing between the various categories. As a result, in practice, the clinicians
21 22 lack any consistency in their labeling, even though the resulting label plays perhaps the

23 most significant role of any aspect of these evaluations in parole consideration. Indeed, on

24 information and belief, no prisoner labeled as a “high” risk on one of the FAD’s reports has 25 26 ever been granted parole.

27

28

17
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 18 of 26

1

53. The use of standardless, arbitrary and inconsistent interpretations of

2 numerical scores on these assessments renders them unreliable. Their use violates

3 Plaintiff’s right to due process.

4

5

EIGHTH CAUSE OF ACTION

6

54. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 53 of

7 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.
8 55. Defendants’ rules ostensibly provide an opportunity for prisoners to submit
9

10 written comments and objections to FAD psychological evaluations and anything else in

11 the file to be considered at the parole hearing. However, Defendants frequently neglect to 12
provide those written comments and objections to the panel of Commissioners and Deputy 13
14 Commissioners presiding over the hearings that are the subjects of those comments. This

15 case is a perfect example. After months of exchanged correspondence between Plaintiff’s
16 counsel and Defendants, the hearing panel was completely unaware of the nature and extent
17
18 of the disputes regarding Dr. Hayward’s report. Having already prepared for the hearing

19 and shown up at San Quentin on hearing day, their prejudice against postponing the hearing
20 in order to fully consider those disputes was clear. Indeed, even though the panel agreed
21 22 with Plaintiff on some of his substantive challenges to Dr. Hayward’s evaluation, the panel

23 relied on its findings anyway.

24

56. Defendants’ failure to provide a meaningful review – or any review at all by

25

26 the hearing commissioners – of the written comments and objections Defendants’ rules

27 ostensibly invite violated Plaintiff’s right to due process.

28

18
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 19 of 26

1

NINTH CAUSE OF ACTION

2

57. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 56 of

3 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.

4

5

58. Defendants deny Plaintiff and all other Lifers the opportunity to meet with,

6 question or investigate FAD psychologists once their reports have been written. Indeed,

7 California law even requires Defendants to make these psychologists available to testify at
8 parole consideration hearings if requested. Cal. Penal Code, § 2081.5; Cal. Govt. Code, §
9

10 11181. However, on information and belief, there are no instances in which a FAD

11 psychologist has testified regarding his or her report in a parole consideration hearing. 12
Defendants refused to even respond to Plaintiff’s multiple requests before and during his 13
14 April 2010 parole hearing.

15

59. Defendants’ denial of at least the limited right to confront and cross examine

16 these putative experts violates due process, particularly given the heightened liberty interest
17

18 at stake and the prominent status of these evaluations in the parole consideration process.

19

TENTH CAUSE OF ACTION

20 60. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 59 of
21
22 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.

23

61. Defendants’ psychological evaluation protocol and regulation provide that a

24 new psychological evaluation may be ordered if there is at least one substantial error and/or 25 26 three or more administrative errors in a FAD report. However, Defendants routinely

27 overlook or discount errors and omissions contained in negative psychological evaluations

28

19
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 20 of 26

1 but they emphasize errors and omissions found in otherwise positive psychological

2 evaluations in order to discredit their conclusions. Here, prior to the parole hearing,

3 Defendants summarily dismissed all nine of Plaintiff’s allegations of substantial errors in 4 5 Dr. Hayward’s report. During the hearing, Defendants simply overlooked the substantial

6 errors they reluctantly acknowledged.

7

62. Defendants’ practice of overlooking substantial and administrative errors in

8

otherwise negative reports while emphasizing such errors in otherwise positive reports 9

10 deprives Plaintiff and others like him of the unbiased decision maker to which they are

11 entitled. This practice therefore violates due process under the Fourteenth Amendment.

12 ELEVENTH CAUSE OF ACTION
13

14

63. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 62 of

15 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.
16 64. California’s parole statute mandates that parole be normally granted at a
17
18 prisoner’s first parole consideration hearing. Cal. Pen. Code, § 3041 (parole “shall

19 normally” be granted at the first hearing). However, in practice, the Board grants parole to
20 less than 1% of prisoners appearing for their initial hearings. This bias against granting
21 22 parole cannot be reconciled with the statutory mandate and therefore violates due process

23 under the Fourteenth Amendment.

24 TWELFTH CAUSE OF ACTION

25

26

65. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 64 of

27 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.

28

20
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 21 of 26

1

66. California law creates a constitutionally protected liberty interest in parole.

2 California respects the significance of this liberty interest by providing several significant

3 protections, including: (1) the right to be provided with advance notice of the hearing (Pen. 4 5 Code, § 3042; Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, § 2246); (2) the right to an opportunity to review

6 and respond to all documents being considered at the hearing (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, §

7 2247); (3) the right to be present, speak, and ask and answer questions (Cal. Code Regs., tit.
8 15, § 2247); (4) the right to not admit guilt to the commitment offense (Pen. Code, § 5011);
9

10 (5) the right to not discuss the circumstances of the offense during the hearing and to not be

11 penalized for invoking that right (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, § 2236); (6) the right to present 12
supporting documents (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, § 2249); (7) the right to appear before an 13
14 impartial hearing panel (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, § 2250); (8) the right to have the

15 assistance of an interpreter, if necessary; (9) the right to receive a verbatim transcript of the
16 hearing; (10) if denied parole, the right to receive a statement of the specific reasons for
17
18 denying parole (Pen. Code, § 3041.5, subd. (a)(4), and § 3042; Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, §

19 2255); and (11) the right to be represented by counsel. Pen. Code, § 3041.7.
20 67. The right to call witnesses, even adverse witnesses, is afforded to parolees
21 22 facing the possible revocation of their parole and return to prison, and it is afforded to

23 prisoners facing disciplinary charges that might result in the loss of good-time credits.

24 However, Defendants deny Plaintiff and others like him the right to call witnesses, 25 26 including adverse witnesses at their parole hearings.

27

28

21
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 22 of 26

1

68. Defendants’ refusal to allow Plaintiff and other Lifers to call FAD

2 psychologists or other witnesses in their parole hearings denies them equal protection under

3 the Fourteenth Amendment.

4

5

THIRTEENTH CAUSE OF ACTION

6

69. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 68 of

7 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.
8 70. California law creates a constitutionally protected liberty interest in parole.
9

10 California respects the significance of this liberty interest by providing several significant

11 protections, including: (1) the right to be provided with advance notice of the hearing (Pen. 12
Code, § 3042; Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, § 2246); (2) the right to an opportunity to review 13
14 and respond to all documents being considered at the hearing (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, §

15 2247); (3) the right to be present, speak, and ask and answer questions (Cal. Code Regs., tit.
16 15, § 2247); (4) the right to not admit guilt to the commitment offense (Pen. Code, § 5011);
17
18 (5) the right to not discuss the circumstances of the offense during the hearing and to not be

19 penalized for invoking that right (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, § 2236); (6) the right to present
20 supporting documents (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, § 2249); (7) the right to appear before an
21 22 impartial hearing panel (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, § 2250); (8) the right to have the

23 assistance of an interpreter, if necessary; (9) the right to receive a verbatim transcript of the

24 hearing; (10) if denied parole, the right to receive a statement of the specific reasons for 25 26 denying parole (Pen. Code, § 3041.5, subd. (a)(4), and § 3042; Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, §

27 2255); and (11) the right to be represented by counsel. Pen. Code, § 3041.7.

28

22
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 23 of 26

1

71. The right to call witnesses, even adverse witnesses, is afforded to parolees

2 facing the possible revocation of their parole and return to prison, and it is afforded to

3 prisoners facing disciplinary charges that might result in the loss of good-time credits. 4 5 However, Defendants deny Plaintiff and others like him the right to call witnesses,

6 including adverse witnesses at their parole hearings.

7

72. Defendants’ refusal to allow Plaintiff and other Lifers to call FAD

8

psychologists or other witnesses in their parole hearings denies them equal protection under 9

10 the California Constitution.

11

FOURTEENTH CAUSE OF ACTION

12 73. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 72 of
13

14 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.

15

74. In their efforts to justify the development of the FAD and its use of the

16 current psychological evaluation methodology and tools, Defendants made numerous false
17

18 and misleading statements to the public and to the California Office of Administrative Law

19 regarding the process for establishing the FAD and selecting the three risk assessment tools
20 currently being utilized by the FAD to predict risk. For example, they falsely claimed a
21 22 consensus among an expert panel Defendants convened to consider the use of various risk

23 assessment tools, and they falsely cited a court mandate to establish the FAD and select the

24 invalid tools.

25

26

75. Defendants’ misconduct and reliance on invalid instruments violated

27 Plaintiff’s right to due process under the California Constitution.

28

23
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 24 of 26

1

FIFTEENTH CAUSE OF ACTION

2

76. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 75 of

3 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.

4

5

77. In their efforts to justify the development of the FAD and its use of the

6 current psychological evaluation methodology and tools, Defendants failed to comply with

7 the notice and timeliness requirements of California’s Administrative Procedures Act.
8 First, Defendants unlawfully implemented their statewide psychological evaluation
9

10 protocol years before providing the required notice to the public or attempting to comply

11 with the administrative procedures act. After California’s Office of Administrative Law 12
declared the protocol to be an unauthorized “underground regulation,” Defendants provided 13
14 false and misleading statements to the public and to the Office of Administrative Law,

15 failed to address the vast majority of substantive public comments and objections, and
16 ultimately enacted regulations in a clandestine manner that appeared to violate applicable
17
18 timeliness and filing requirements. As a result, Defendants continue applying a regulation

19 and protocol that are invalid and unauthorized.
20 78. Defendant’s conduct in promulgating Section 2240 of Title 15 of the
21 22 California Code of Regulations violated California’s Administrative Procedures Act and

23 denied Plaintiff due process under the California Constitution.

24 SIXTEENTH CAUSE OF ACTION

25

26

79. Plaintiff realleges and incorporates by reference paragraphs 1 through 78 of

27 this complaint as though fully set forth herein.

28

24
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 25 of 26

1

80. California law requires Defendants to make FAD psychologists available to

2 testify at parole consideration hearings if requested. Cal. Penal Code, § 2081.5; Cal. Govt.

3 Code, § 11181. However, on information and belief, Defendants have never or almost 4 5 never required a FAD psychologist to answer questions about his or her evaluation during a

6 parole consideration hearing.

7

81. Defendants’ failure to comply with these statutory provisions also violated

8

Plaintiff’s right to due process under the California Constitution. 9

10

PRAYER FOR RELIEF

11

Wherefore, Plaintiff prays for the following relief:

12 1. Declare that Defendants have denied Plaintiff’s rights under the due process and
13

14

equal protection clauses of the state and federal Constitutions;

15

2. Declare that the regulation governing the FAD and its psychological evaluations,

16 Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, § 2240, is void and unenforceable;
17

18

3. Declare that Plaintiff has a constitutionally protected liberty interest in parole;

19 4. Declare that due process provides at least a limited right to confront and cross

20 examine adverse witnesses when a parole decision rests substantially on expert
21

22

reports;

23 5. Declare that due process requires Plaintiff to have access to the raw data and scores

24

underlying FAD’s psychological evaluations;

25

26

27

28

25
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

Case 2:12-cv-01059-KJM-AC Document 1 Filed 04/20/12 Page 26 of 26

1

6. Issue a preliminary and permanent injunction requiring Defendants to discontinue

2

application of its rules governing the FAD, Cal. Code Regs., tit. 15, § 2240, on the

3

grounds that the regulation was fraudulently and unlawfully promulgated;

4

5

7. Order Defendants to remove Dr. Hayward’s report from Plaintiff’s file and prohibit

6

its consideration in conjunction with Plaintiff’s suitability for parole;

7

8. Award costs and attorneys fees incurred in this action; and

8

9. Order such other and further relief as may be just and proper. 9

10

Dated: April 20, 2012

11

Respectfully Submitted,

12 UNCOMMON LAW
13

14

/s/ Keith Wattley

By: ___________________

15

Keith Wattley

16

Attorney for Plaintiff

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

26
Civil Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief Johnson v. Shaffer

