′ be the conjunction of clauses forming the problem. The DavisPutnam-Logemann-Loveland algorithm (DPLL) decides a propositional formula in CNF (conjunction of clauses) by maintaining a partial assignment of the variables (that is, an assignment to only some of the variables) and Boolean constraint propagation: if we have assigned a = f , b = t and we have a clause a ∨ ¬b ∨ c, then we can derive c = t. If an assignment satisfies all clauses, then the algorithm terminates with one solution. If it falsifies at least one clause, then there is no solution for our starting partial assignment (thus no solution at all if our starting partial assignment was empty). If propagation is insufficient to conclude, then the algorithm chooses a variable x and a true value b and extends the assignment with x = b; if no solution is found for that assignment, then it backtracks and replaces it by x =b. The solver thus constructs a search tree. The practical performance of the solver depends highly on the heuristics for choosing x and b. Much effort has been put into researching these heuristics, such as Variable State Independent Decaying Sum (VSIDS) BIB9292941 ; understanding why they work well is an active research topic. The Boolean constraint propagation phase must be implemented very efficiently, using data structures that minimize the traversal of irrelevant data (clauses that will not result in further propagation); e.g. the two watched literals per clause scheme [47, §4.5. From a run of the DPLL algorithm concluding to unsatisfiability one can extract a resolution proof of unsatisfiability. The proof has the form of a tree whose leaves are some of the original clauses of the problem (constituting an unsatisfiable core) and whose inner nodes correspond to the choices made during the search. Each inner node is the application of the resolution rule: knowing C 1 ∨ a and C 2 ∨ā, where C 1 and C 2 are clauses and a is a choice variable, one can derive C 1 ∨ C 2 , written: Example 3. Consider the system of clauses 7. Boolean clause propagation from unit clause φ simplifiesφ ∨ g andφ ∨ h into g and h respectively, and removes clauseḡ ∨h ∨ φ. Since g and h are now t, we can remove clausesē ∨ g and f ∨ g, b ∨ h, and c ∨ h, and simplifyḡ ∨ e ∨ f into e ∨ f andh ∨b ∨c intob ∨c: The system no longer has unit clauses to propagate and thus must pick a literal, for instance b. By propagation, the system now reaches a contradiction. Since contradiction was reached from assumption b, the converseb must be assumed. In fact, it is possible to derive the learned clauseb by resolution from the set of clauses: From any "unsatisfiable" run of a DPLL (even in the CDCL variant, see below) solver, a resolution proof can be extracted. This is a fundamental limitation of that approach, since it is known that for certain families of formulas, such as the pigeonhole principle BIB3479956 , any resolution proof has exponential size in the size of the formula -thus any DPLL/CDCL solver will take exponential time. Performance was considerably increased by extending DPLL with clause learning, yielding constraint-driven clause learning (CDCL) algorithms BIB1403165 . In CDCL, when a partial assignments leads by propagation to the falsification of a clause, the deductions made during this propagation are analyzed to obtain a subset of the partial assignment sufficient to entail the falsification of this clause. This subset yields a conjunctionx 1 ∧ · · · ∧x n (wherex i is either x i or ¬x i ), such that its conjunction with F ′ is unsatisfiable. In other words, it yields a clause ¬x 1 ∨ · · · ∨ ¬x n that is a consequence of F ′ (in fact, that clause can be obtained by resolution from F ′ ). This clause can thus be conjoined to the problem F ′ without changing its set of solutions; but learning that clause may help cut branches in the search tree early. Again, the learned clause appears as the root of a resolution proof whose leaves are clauses of the original problem. Since the same learned clause may be used several times, the final proof appears as a directed acyclic graph (DAG, i.e., a tree with shared sub-branches). There exist formulas admitting DAG resolution proofs exponentially shorter than the smallest tree resolution proof  . A resolution proof, or a more compact format, may thus be produced during an "unsatisfiable" run. A highly optimized SAT or SMT solver is likely to contain bugs, so it may be desirable to have an independent, simpler, possibly formally verified checker reprocess such as proof BIB17347292  BIB8015835 ].