The most common way to deal with atomic propositions inside satisfiability testing is the so-called DPLL(T ) scheme, combining a CDCL satisfiability solver and a decision procedure for conjunctions of propositions from theory T . A quantifier-free formula F over T , say is converted into a propositional formula by replacing each atomic proposition by a propositional variable, using a dictionary (here, and after conversion to canonical form (so that e.g. x + y ≥ 1 and 2x + 2y − 2 ≥ 0 are considered the same, and x + y < 1 is considered as ¬(x + y ≥ 1)). F ′ realizes a propositional abstraction of F : any solution of F induces a solution of F ′ , but not all solutions of The theory clauseb ∨c ∨d is then conjoined to F ′ . Then the propositional problem becomes unsatisfiable, establishing that F has no solution. We have therefore refined the propositional abstraction according to spurious counterexamples. In current implementations, the propositional solver does not wait until a total satisfying assignment is computed to call the decision procedure for conjunctions of theory formulas. Partial assignments, commonly at each decision point in the DPLL/CDCL algorithm, are tested for satisfiability. In addition, the theory solver may, opportunistically, perform theory propagation: if it notices that some asserted constraints imply the truth or falsehood of another known predicate, it can signal it to the SAT solver. The theory solver should be incremental, that is, suited for fast addition or retraction of theory constraints, keeping enough internal state to avoid needless recomputation. The SAT solver should be incremental as well, allowing the dynamic addition of clauses. Multiple theories may be combined, most often by a variant of the NelsonOppen approach [44, Ch. 10].