Consider quantifier-free propositional formulas, that is, formulas constructed from unknowns (or variables) taking the values "true" (t) and "false" (f ) and propositional connectives ∨ (or), ∧ (and), ¬ (not);x shall be short-hand for ¬x. 2 A formula is: in negation normal form (NNF) if the only ¬ connectives are at the leaves of its syntax tree (that is, wrap around unknowns but not larger formulas); a clause if it is a disjunction of literals (a literal is an unknown or its negation); in disjunctive normal form (DNF) if it is a disjunction of conjunctions of literals; in conjunctive normal form (CNF) if it is a conjunction of clauses. If A implies B, then A is stronger than B and B weaker than A. Uppercase letters (F ) shall denote formulas, lowercase letters (x) unknowns, and lowercase bold letters ( x) vectors of unknowns. Satisfiability testing consists in deciding whether there exists a satisfying assignment (or solution) for these unknowns, that is, an assignment making the formula true. For instance, a = t, b = t, c = f is a satisfying assignment for (a ∨ c) ∧ (b ∨ c) ∧ (ā ∨c). In case the formula is satisfiable, a solver is generally expected to provide such a satisfying assignment; in the case it is unsatisfiable, it may be queried for an unsatisfiable core, a subset of the conjunction given as input to the solver that is still unsatisfiable. Satisfiability modulo theory extends propositional satisfiability by having some atomic propositions be predicates from a theory. For instance, (x > 0 ∨ c) ∧ (y > 0 ∨ c) ∧ (x ≤ 0 ∨c) is a formula over linear rational arithmetic (LRA) or linear integer arithmetic (LIA), depending on whether x and y are to be interpreted over the rationals or integers. Different unknowns may range in different sets; for instance f (x) = f (y)∧x = z + 1 ∧ z = y − 1 has unknowns f : Z → Z and x, y, z ∈ Z. This formula is said to be over the combination of uninterpreted functions and linear integer arithmetic (UFLIA). In this formula, f is said to be uninterpreted because we give no definition for it; we shall see in Sec. 2.6 that this formula has no satisfying assignment and how to establish this fact automatically.