Example 5. Let n > 0 be a constant integer. Let (t i ) 0≤i≤n , (x i ) 0≤i<n and (y i ) 0≤i<n be real unknowns (or rational or integer). Let These formulas are known as "diamond formulas" since they correspond to paths in a difference graph composed of "diamonds": To a human, it is obvious that D i ⇒ t i+1 ≤ t i + 5 and thus P n is unsatisfiable. A DPLL(T) solver, however, proceeds by elimination of contradictory conjunctions of atoms from the original formula. Any contradictory conjunction of atoms from P n must include a conjunction of the form There are an exponential number of such conjunctions, and a DPLL(T) solver has to block them by theory lemmas one by one. In other words, the proof system used by a DPLL(T) solver is sufficient to prove that a "diamond formula" is unsolvable, but needs exponential proofs for doing so. Any pure DPLL(T) solver, whatever its heuristics and implementation, must thereof run in exponential time on this family of formulas. This motivated the study of algorithms capable of inferring lemmas involving new atoms (Sec. 3.2). Diamond formulas are simplifications of formulas occurring in e.g. worstcase execution time and scheduling applications. The solution proposed in BIB704180 was to pre-compute upper bounds t j − t i ≤ B ij on the difference of arrival times between i and j (or, equivalently, the total time spent in the program between i and j) and conjoin these bounds to the problems. These bounds are logically implied by the original problem, and thus the set of solutions (valid execution traces with timings) does not change; but the resulting formula is considerably more tractable. The lemmas t j − t i ≤ B ij and t k − t j ≤ B ik allow the solver to avoid exploring many combinations of paths i → j and j → k: for instance, if one searches for a path such that t k − t i ≥ 100, it is known that t k − t j ≤ 40, and the solver explores a path i → j such that t j − t i ≤ 42 on this path, then the solver can immediately cut the search without exploring the paths j → k in detail.