In the case of linear rational, or equivalently real, arithmetic (LRA), the theory solver is typically implemented using a variant BIB12576417  of the simplex algorithm BIB53739754 BIB29180149 . The atomic (in)equalities from the formula, put in canonical form, are collected; new variables are introduced for the linear combinations of variables that are not of the form ±x where x is a variable. For instance, (11) is rewritten as (x ≥ 0 ∨ α ≥ 1) ∧ (y ≥ 0) ∧ (β ≤ −1), together with the system of linear equalities α = 2x + y and β = x + y. The simplex algorithm both maintains a tableau and, for each variable, a current valuation and optional lower and upper bounds. At all times, the simplex tableau contains a system of linear equalities equivalent to this system, such that the variables are partitioned into those (basic variables) occurring (each alone) on the left side and those occurring on the right side. The nonbasic variables are assigned one of their bounds, or at least a value between these bounds. The simplex algorithm tries to fit each basic variable within its bounds; if one does not fit, it makes it non-basic and assigns to it the bound that was exceeded, and selects a formerly non-basic variable to make it basic, through a pivoting operation maintaining the equivalence of the system of equalities. The algorithm stops when either a candidate solution fitting all bounds is found, either one equation in the simplex tableau can be shown to have no solution using interval arithmetic from the bounds of the variables (the interval obtained from the right hand side does not intersect that of the basic variable on the left hand side). A pivot selection ordering is used to ensure that the algorithm always terminates. Theory propagation may be performed by noticing that the current tableau implies that some literals are satisfied. This system is turned into a system of equations ("tableau") and a system of inequalities on the variables: The variables on the left of the equal signs are deemed "nonbasic" and those on the right are "basic". The simplex algorithm performs pivoting steps on the tableau, akin to those of Gaussian eliminations, until a tableau such as this one is reached: Now consider the first equation (e =). By interval analysis, knowing c ≤ 18 and d ≥ −2, −7/16c − 1/16d ≤ 8. Yet e ≥ 20, thus the system has no solution. These coefficients 7/16 and 1/16 can be applied to the original inequalities constraining c and d, with coefficient 1 for that defining e, and the resulting inequalities are summed into a trivially false one: By reading nonzero coefficients off the conflicting line of the simplex tableau, one gets a minimal set of contradictory constraints: d + 1 constraints, corresponding to the nonbasic variable and the basic variables with nonzero multipliers, where d is the dimension of the space. These multipliers may be presented as an unsatisfiability witness to an independent proof checker. Most SMT solvers implement the simplex algorithm using rational arithmetic. In most cases arising from verification problems, rational arithmetic can be performed using machine integers, without need for going into extended precision arithmetic [57] . A common implementation trick is to use a datatype containing a machine-integer (numerator , denominator ) pair or a pointer to an extended precision rational.  This approach is however very inefficient in the rare cases where the solver goes a lot into extended precision: the size of numerators and denominators grows fast. This is why it was proposed to perform linear programming in floating-point arithmetic BIB1609240 BIB5542629 BIB18627277  . BIB117942539 Because the results of floating-point computations cannot be immediately trusted, some checking is needed. One idea is not to recover floating-point numeric information, but the final partition between basic and nonbasic variables BIB5542629 BIB18627277  ; once this partition is known, the tableau is uniquely defined and can be computed by plain linear arithmetic -Gaussian elimination, or better algorithms, including multimodular [66, ch. 7] or p-adic approaches. 6 It is then easy to check the alleged conflicting line, in exact precision. In some cases, linear arithmetic reasoning may be used to prove the unsatisfiability of polynomial problems. One approach is to expand polynomials and consider all monomials as independent variables (e.g. xy 2 is replaced by a fresh unknown v xy 2 ). A refinement BIB13975448 is to consider lemmas stating that if two polynomials are nonnegative, then so is their product: e.g. 7 Because the set of such products has size exponential in the maximal degree, heuristics are used to pick the most promising ones. Experiments have shown this approach to be competitive, even with a rudimentary and sub-optimal connection between linear SMT-solver and nonlinear reasoning. Some earlier solvers (e.g. CVC3) solver linear real arithmetic by FourierMotzkin elimination  . This approach is generally not considered efficient, since Fourier-Motzkin elimination tends to generate many redundant constraints, which then may need to be eliminated by linear programming, which defeats the purpose of avoiding using the simplex algorithm. Assume variables x 1 , . . . , x n have been assigned values v(x 1 ), . . . , v(x n ) in the current branch of the search, and that two atoms x n+1 ≤ a and x n+1 ≥ b, where a and b are linear combinations of variables other than x n+1 , have been assigned to t, such that b > a in the assignment v; then it is impossible to pick a value for x n+1 in that assignment. In fact, it is impossible to pick a value for it in any assignment such that b > a. Assignments that conflict for the same reason are eliminated by a FourierMotzkin elimination  elementary step, valid for all x 1 , . . . , x n+1 : Example 7. Consider Ex. 5 with n = 3. The solver has clauses x i − t i ≤ 2, But then, there is no way to assign t 3 , because of the current assignment x 2 → 0 and the inequalities t 3 − x 2 ≤ 3 and t 3 ≥ 16. The solver then learns by Fourier-Motzkin: (20) which may in fact be immediately simplified by resolution with the original clause t 3 ≥ 16 to yield ¬(t 3 − x 2 ≤ 3) ∨ x 2 ≥ 13. The assignment to x 2 is retracted. But then, there is no way to assign x 2 , because of the current assignment t 2 → 0 and the inequality x 2 −t 2 ≤ 2. The solver then learns by Fourier-Motzkin: The truth assignment to t 3 − x 2 ≤ 3 is retracted. At this point, the solver has t 0 → 0, By similar reasoning in that branch, the solver derives t 3 − x 2 ≤ 3 ∨ t 2 ≥ 11. By resolution between the outcomes of both branches, one gets t 2 ≥ 11. By similar reasoning, one gets t 1 ≥ 6 and then t 0 ≥ 1, but then there is no satisfying assignment to t 0 . The problem has no solution. In contrast to the exponential behavior of DPLL(T) on Ex. 5, MCSAT has linear behavior: each branch of each individual disjunction is explored only once, and the whole disjunction is then summarized by an extra atom. The dynamic generation of new atoms by MCSAT, as opposed to DPLL(T), creates two issues. i) If infinitely many new atoms may be generated, termination is no longer ensured. One can ensure termination by restricting the generation of new atoms to a finite basis (this basis of course depends on the original formula); this is the case for instance if the numeric variables x 1 , . . . , x n are always assigned in the same order, thus the generated new atoms are results of Fourier-Motzkin elimination of x n , then of x n−1 etc. down to x 2 . 9 In practice, the interest of being able to choose variable ordering trumps the desire to prove termination. ii) Since many new atoms and clauses are generated, some garbage collection must be applied, as with learned clauses in a CDCL solver. Implementation-wise, note that, like a clause in CDCL, a linear inequality is processed only when all variables except for one are assigned. Similar to two watched literals per clause, one can apply two watched variables per inequality.