The DPLL approach is to assign to each unknown (propositional variable) one of t, f , and "undecided" -that is, a non-empty subset of the set of possible values {t, f }. Initially, all variables are assigned to "undecided". Then, the Boolean constraint propagation phase uses each individual clause as a constraint over its literals: if all literals except for one are assigned to f , then the last one gets assigned to t. In other words, information known about some variables leads to information on other variables linked by the same constraint. If the information derived is that some variable cannot be assigned some value ("contradiction"), then it means the problem is unsatisfiable. In most cases, however, a contradiction cannot be derived by only the initial pass of propagation. In that case, the system picks an undecided variable and splits the search between the t and f cases. Several splits may be needed, thus the formation of a search tree. If a contradiction is derived in a branch, that branch is closed and the system backtracks to an earlier level. That approach may be extended to variables lying within an arbitrary domain D, say, the real numbers or the floating-point numbers. The system maintains for each variable an assignment to a subset of D (several types of variables may be used simultaneously, there may therefore be several D), chosen among an abstract domain 8 D ♯ of subsets of D; say, for numeric variables, D ♯ may be the set of closed intervals of D. Constraints may now constrain variables of different types, and each constraint acts as a propagator of information. For instance, if there is a constraint x = y + z, and x is currently assigned the interval [1, +∞) and y the interval  BIB7557753 , then, applying z = x − y, one can derive x ∈ [−9, +∞): the current interval for x may thus be refined. Note that, for soundness, it is not important that the information propagated should be optimally precise, as long as it contains the possible values: in the above example, it would be sound to propagate x ∈ [−9.1, +∞) -but unsound to derive xx ∈ [−8.99, +∞). In the case of interval propagation for D = R, one sound way to implement it is using floating-point interval arithmetic with directed rounding: the upper bound of an interval is rounded towards +∞, the lower bound towards −∞. ACDCL also applies clause learning, but in a more general manner than CDCL BIB7557753 Sec. 5] . Consider F △ = y = x ∧ z = x · y ∧ z ≤ −1 and a search context with x ≤ −4. Then, by interval propagation, y ≤ −4, and z ≥ 16, which contradicts z ≤ −1. CDCL-style clause learning would learn that x ≤ −4 contradicts F , and thus learn the clause ¬(x ≤ −4) ≡ x > −4. But there is a weaker reason why such choice of x contradicts F : x < 0 is sufficient to ensure contradiction; the solver can exclude a larger part of the search space by learning the clause ¬(x < 0) ≡ x ≥ 0. Generalizing the reasons for a contradiction is a form of abduction. One difficulty is that there may be no weakest generalization expressible in the abstract domain: for instance, the choices x ≥ 10 and y ≥ 10 contradict the constraint x + y < 10, but x ≥ 0 ∧ y ≥ 10, x ≥ 5 ∧ y ≥ 5 and x ≥ 10 ∧ y ≥ 0 are three incomparable generalizations of the contradiction (leading to three clauses x < 0 ∨ y < 10 etc.), which are optimal in the sense that if one fixes the interval for x (resp. y), the interval for y (resp. x) is the largest that still ensures contradiction.