Satisfiability modulo theory (SMT) solving consists in deciding the satisfiability of a first-order formula with unknowns and relations lying in certain theories. For instance, the following formula has no solution x, y ∈ R: The formula may contain negations (¬), conjunctions (∧), disjunctions (∨) and, possibly, quantifiers (∃, ∀). A SMT-solver reports whether a formula is satisfiable, and if so, may provide a model of this satisfaction; for instance, if one omits x ≥ 1 in the preceding formula, then its solutions include (x = 0, y = 1). Other possible features include dynamic addition and retraction of constraints, production of proofs and Craig interpolants (Sec. 4.2), and optimization (Sec. 4.3). SMT-solving has major applications in the formal verification of hardware, software, and control systems. Quantifier-free SMT subsumes Boolean satisfiability (SAT), the canonical NP-complete problem, and certain classes of formulas accepted by SMT-solvers belong to higher complexity classes or are even undecidable. This has not deterred researchers from looking for algorithms that, in practice, solve many relevant instances at reasonable costs. Care is taken that the worst-case cost does not extend to situations that can be dealt with more cheaply. Most SMT solvers follow the DPLL(T) framework (Sec. 2.2): a CDCL solver for SAT (Sec. 2.1) is used to traverse the Boolean structure, and conjunctions of atoms from the formula are passed to a solver for the theory. This approach limits the interaction between theory values and Boolean reasoning, which led to the introduction of natural domain approaches (Sec. 3). Finally, we shall see in Sec. 4 how to go beyond mere quantifier-free satisfiability testing, by handling quantifiers, providing Craig interpolants, or providing optimal solutions. Let us now first see a few generalities, and how SMT-solving is used in practice.