In the case of linear integer arithmetic, the scheme generally used is the same as the one generally used for integer linear programming: the solver first attempts solving the rational relaxation of the problem (nonstrict inequalities are kept, strict inequalities x < e are rewritten as x ≤ e − 1). If there is no solution over the rationals, there is no integer solution. If a rational solution is found, and has only integral coefficients (say, (x, y, z) = (0, 1, 2)), then the problem is decided. If the proposed solution has non-integral coefficients (say, (x, y, z) = ( 1 3 , 0, 1)), then it is excluded by a constraint removing not only that spurious solution but a whole chunk of them. Traditional approaches include i) branch-and-bound [63, Sec. 24.1]: add a lemma excluding one segment of non-integral values of the fractional unknowns (here, x ≤ 0 ∨ x ≥ 1); branching is however not guaranteed to 4 e.g. ZArith https://forge.ocamlcore.org/projects/zarith BIB117942539 The performance with linear programming solvers meant for large industrial instances was however disappointing BIB1609240 , due to overhead. Closer integration is needed. BIB41802054 As implemented in e.g. Linbox (http://www.linalg.org/ ), IML (https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/~astorjoh/iml.html) BIB7380429 and SageMath (http://www.sagemath.org/). BIB32422648 One can in fact prove a form of completeness of that approach when the problem contains linear constraints defining a bounded polyhedron, and one nonlinear constraint: if such a problem is unsatisfiable, then this can be proved by going to a sufficiently high degree of products. This follows from Krivine-Handelman's theorem BIB59380062 43] . terminate in general BIB5542629 . ii) Gomory cuts BIB29180149 Ch. 23] iii) branch-and-cut  , a combination of both of the above iv) cuts from proofs or extended branches BIB43656024 , which can generate e.g. x ≤ z ∨ x ≥ z + 1. The full integer linear decision procedure can be encapsulated and only export theory lemmas and theory propagation, just as the rational linear procedure, or export the branching lemma to the SMT solver, as a learned clause, so as to allow propositional reasoning over it. An alternative to linear programming plus branching and/or cuts is Pugh's Omega test BIB3174094 , which may also be used to simplify constraints. This test is based on Fourier-Motzkin elimination  , with the twist that, due to divisibility constraints, it may need to enumerate cases up to the least common multiple of the divisors.