The following conjunction is satisfiable if and only if it is possible to go from a model x 0 of A to a model x n of B by a sequence of transitions (τ i ) 1≤i≤n : In program analysis, A typically expresses a precondition, ¬B a postcondition, x i the variables of the program after i instruction steps, and τ i the semantics of the i-th instruction in a sequence, and the formula is unsatisfiable if and only if B is always true after executing that sequence of instruction starting from A. A hand proof of unsatisfiability would often consist in exhibiting predicates I 1 ( x 1 ), . . . , I n−1 ( x n−1 ), such that, posing I 0 = A and I n = B, for all 0 ≤ i < n, along with proofs of these local inductiveness implications. A SMT-solver, in contrast, produces a monolithic proof of unsatisfiability of (23): it mixes variables from different x i , that is, in program analysis, from different times of the execution of the program. It is however possible to obtain instead a sequence I i satisfying (24) by post-processing that proof  BIB9894463 BIB12426670 . In any theory admitting quantifier elimination, such a sequence must exist: defines the strongest sequence of valid interpolants; the weakest is: The strongest sequence corresponds to computing exactly the sequence of sets of states reachable by τ 1 , then τ 2 • τ 1 etc. from A. Binary interpolation consists in: given A and B, produce I such that in which case, if the theory admits quantifier elimination, ∃ x 0 A( x 0 , x 1 ) and ∀ x 2 B( x 1 , x 2 ) are respectively the strongest and weakest interpolant, and any One of the main uses of Craig interpolation in program analysis is to synthesize inductive invariants, for instance by counterexample-guided abstraction refinement in predicate abstraction (CEGAR) BIB7727172 or property-guided reachability (PDR). Interpolants obtained by quantifier elimination are too specific (overfitting): for instance, strongest interpolants exactly fit the set of states reachable in 1, 2, . . . steps. It has been argued that interpolants likely to be useful as inductive invariants should be "simple" -short formula, with few "magical constants". A variety of approaches have been proposed for getting such interpolants BIB8753498 BIB15409613 BIB11496209 or to simplify existing interpolants BIB8998909 . Example 9. Consider the interpolation problem A ⇒ I, I ⇒ ¬B (Fig. 1) : SMTInterpol 14 and MathSAT 15 produce I △ = x ≤ 1 ∨ y ≤ 1. This is due to the way these tools produce interpolants from DPLL(T) proofs of unsatisfiability. On this example, a DPLL(T) solver will essentially analyze both branches of A 1 ∨A 2 . The first branch yields A 1 ⇒ ¬B. Finding I 1 such that A 1 ⇒ I 1 and I 1 ⇒ ¬B amounts to finding a separating hyperplane between these two convex polyhedra; I 1 △ = x ≤ 1 works. Similarly, I 2 such that A 1 ⇒ I 2 and I 2 ⇒ ¬B can be I 2 △ = y ≤. I 1 ∨ I 2 is then produced as interpolant. Yet, a search for a single separating hyperplane may produce x + 2y ≤ 9, or x + y ≤ 5. The second hyperplane may seem preferable according to a criterion limiting the magnitude of integer constants. It is easy to see that if one can find interpolants for arbitrary conjunctions A, B such that A ⇒ ¬B, one can find them between arbitrary quantifier-free formulas, by putting them into DNF. Because such a procedure would be needlessly costly due to disjunctive normal forms, the usual approach is to post-process a DPLL(T) proof that A( x, y)∧B( y, z) is unsatisfiable  BIB9894463 . First, interpolants are derived for all theory lemmas: each lemma expresses that a conjunction of atoms from the original formula is unsatisfiable, these atoms can thus be divided into a conjunction α of atoms from A and a conjunction β of atoms from B, and an interpolant I is derived for α ⇒ ¬β. Then, these interpolants are combined following the resolution proof of the solver. This is how the interpolants from Ex. 9 were produced by the solvers. The problem is therefore: given A( x, y) ∧ B( y, z) unsatisfiable, where A and B are conjunctions, how do we find I( y) such that A ⇒ I and I ⇒ ¬B? If the theory is linear rational arithmetic, this amounts to finding a separating hyperplane between the polyhedra A and B. Let us note Each a ′ i (resp. b i is infinitesimal; all other numbers are assumed to be real. y ≥ (x R , x ǫ ) with x ǫ > 0 and y ∈ R expresses that y > x R . Since A∧B is unsatisfiable, by Farkas' lemma, there exists an unsatisfiability witness (λ i ), (µ j ), such that Such coefficients can in fact be read off the simplex tableau from the most common way of implementing a DPLL(T) solver for linear real arithmetic, as described in Sec. 2.3. Then the following is a valid interpolant (recall that the right-hand side can contain infinitesimals, leading to >): For polynomial arithmetic, one approach replaces nonnegative reals by sumsof-squares of polynomials, and Farkas' lemma by Positivstellensatz BIB8324645 . Another difficulty is posed for certain theories, for which the solving process involves generating lemmas introducing atoms not present in the original. Consider the approaches for linear integer arithmetic described in Section 2.4: except for branch-and-bound, all can generate new constraints involving any of the unknowns, without respecting the original partition of variables. This poses a problem for interpolation: if interpolating for A(x, y) ∧ B(y, z) over linear real arithmetic, we can rely on all atomic propositions being linear inequalities either over x, y or y, z, but here, we have new atomic propositions that can involve both x, z. Special theory-dependent methods are needed to get rid of these new propositions when processing the DPLL(T) proof into an interpolant  BIB9894463 .