SMT solvers can be used i) as a library, from an application programming interface, typically from C/C++, Java, Python, or OCaml ii) as an independent process, from a textual representation, possibly through a bidirectional pipe. Listing 1: Example of SMT-LIB 2 file. Assertions x ≥ 0, y ≤ 0, f (x) = f (y) and x + y ≤ 0 are added, then the problem is checked to be unsatisfiable. The last assertion is retracted and replaced by x+ y ≤ 1, the problem becomes satisfiable and a model is requested (see Listing 2) ( s e t − l o g i c QF_UFLIA ) ( set−option : produce−models t r u e ) ( declare−fun x ( ) I n t ) ( declare−fun y ( ) I n t ) ( declare−fun f ( I n t ) I n t ) ( a s s e r t ( >= x 0 ) ) ( a s s e r t ( >= y 0 ) ) ( a s s e r t ( d i s t i n c t ( f x ) ( f y ) ) ) ( push 1 ) ( a s s e r t ( <= (+ x y ) 0 ) ) ( check−sat ) ( pop 1 ) ( a s s e r t ( <= (+ x y ) 1 ) ) ( check−sat ) ( get−model ) Listing 2: Z3's answers to the SMT-LIB Listing 1 unsat s a t ( model ( define−fun y ( ) I n t 1 ) ( define−fun x ( ) I n t 0 ) ( define−fun f ( ( x ! 1 I n t ) ) I n t ( i t e (= x ! 1 0 ) 2 ( i t e (= x ! 1 1 ) 3 2 ) ) ) ) APIs for SMT-solvers are not standardized, though there have been efforts such as JavaSMT 3 to provide a common layer for several solvers. In contrast, much effort has been put into designing and supporting the common SMT-LIB  format, a textual representation (Listing 1); some solvers support other languages than SMT-LIB, sometimes alongside it. Libraries of benchmark problems, sorted according to the theories involved and the presence or absence of quantifiers (Tab. 1), are available in that format. New theories are proposed; for instance, a theory for constraints over IEEE-754 floating-point arithmetic  is under evaluation. Alas, some features, such as quantifier elimination or the extraction of Craig interpolants (Sec. 4.2) do not have standard commands. Furthermore, not all tools implement all operators and commands following the standard.