Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 109 Filed 02/06/2006 Page 1 of 4

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT EASTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN
SOUTHERN DIVISION

ANTHONY LYNCH-BEY, Plaintiff,
v. JOHN RUBITSCHUN ET AL.,
Defendant(s).

Case No. 05-71318 (Previously consolidated with 05-72378) Honorable Nancy G. Edmunds
/

ORDER
1. GRANTING PLAINTIFF’S MOTION FOR SEVERANCE OF CLAIMS [64]; 2. GRANTING IN PART PLAINTIFF’ S MOTION TO STRIKE DEFENDANT’S
RESPONSES AND/OR FOR A MORE DEFINITE STATEMENT [99]; 3. VACATING ORDER OF CONSOLIDATION WITH CASE NO. 05-71318 [7]
AND REOPENING CASE NO. 05-72378; 4. DENYING PLAINTIFF’S MOTION FOR CLASS CERTIFICATION [2]; 5. DENYING APPLICANTS’ MOTION TO INTERVENE AS PLAINTIFFS [5]; 6. DENYING APPLICANTS’ MOTION TO INTERVENE AS PLAINTIFFS [96]; 7. DENYING APPLICANTS’ MOTION TO INTERVENE AS PLAINTIFFS [104]; 8. DISMISSING PROPOSED CLASS PLAINTIFFS.
On April 5, 2005, a class action complaint was filed in this Court under 29 U.S.C. §
1983, alleging violation of the Ex Post Fa cto Clause and the Due Proces s Clause of the
United States Cons titution. The plaintiffs are parolable life inmates in the Michigan
Department of Corrections who were convicted before October 1, 1992, for whom parole
has been rejected or deferred; the defendants are members of the Michigan Parole Board
and the Director of the Michi gan Department of Corrections. That case is captioned
Kenneth Foster-Bey et al. v. Rubitschun eat l., Case No. 05-71318 (“the Foster-Bey Case”).

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 109 Filed 02/06/2006 Page 2 of 4
On June 15, 2005, Plaintiff Anthony Lynch-Bey filed this action 1 (“the Lynch-Bey Case”), which makes substantially similarallegations and names the same Defendants as the Foster-Bey Case. Plaintiff sought in his Co mplaint certification of a class of similarly situated prisoners.
On July 21, 2005, this Court issued an Orderconsolidating the Foster-Bey Case with the Lynch-Bey Case. All briefing has since been in the Foster-Bey Case, a consolidated class action, Case No. 05-71318. There hasbeen some progress in the consolidated case, including the Court’s granting of the plaintfifs’ Motion for Class Certification and the setting of discovery and motion schedules.
It now appears, however, that Plaintiff Anthony Lynch-Bey wishes to pursue different theories and strategies against Defendants, and he urges the Court to separate his case from the Foster-Bey Case. He has moved for a severance of claims, as well as to strike Defendants’ responses and/or for a more definite statement. The Court GRANTS these Motions inasmuch as they seek to separatethe cases and compel Defendants to respond to Plaintiff Anthony Lynch-Bey independent of the Foster-Bey Case. Accordingly, the Court hereby VACATES its July 21 Order and REOPENS the Lynch-Bey Case, No. 05-72378. The Foster-Bey Case and the Lynch-Bey Case shall proceed independent of one-another.
Further, the Court hereby rules that while Plaintiff Anthony Lynch-Bey may pursue his claims pro se, he may not represent a class of individuals. “The right to litigate for oneself . . . does not create a coordinate right to litigate for others. The reasoning behind this rule
1The first document on the docket is entitled, “PLAINTIFFS MOTION FOR PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION,” and, “MOT ION FOR CERTIFICATION O F CLASS ACTION.” (Case No. 05-72378, Doc. 1.) F or purposes of this pro se lawsuit, the Court construes this document as a complaint.
2

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 109 Filed 02/06/2006 Page 3 of 4
is two-fold: it protects the rights of t hose before the court and jealously guards the judiciary’s authority to govern those who practice in its courtrooms.” Myers v. Loudon County Pub. Schs, 418 F.3d 395, 400 (4th Cir. 2005) (citations omitted). Thus, the Court hereby DENIES Plaintiff AnthonyLynch-Bey’s Motion for Class Certification, as well as the three separate Motions to I ntervene as Plaintiffs filed in connection with the Lynch-Bey Case. The Court DISMISSES all Plaintiffs from the Lynch-Bey Case, No. 05-72378, with the exception of Mr. Lynch-Bey himself.
The Court notes that al l parties who have moved to i ntervene as plaintiffs in the Lynch-Bey Case but have been excluded becauseof the Court’s above ruling may choose to be represented by class counselin the Foster-Bey Case, pursuant to other requirements for class membership.2

Dated: February 6, 2006

s/Nancy G. Edmunds Nancy G. Edmunds United States District Judge

2Class counsel for the Foster-Bey Case, No. 05-71318, has posted a Notice of Class Certification to potential plaintiffs. The Notice is addressed to
All parolable lifers in the custody of the Michigan Department of Corrections who were convicted before October 1, 1992, and whos e parole the “new” parole board has denied, passed over, expressed no interest in pursuing, or otherwise rejected or deferred . . . .
Potential litigants who fall into the above description should contact the Michigan Clinical Law Program, 363 Legal Research Building, 801 Monroe St., Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1215.
3

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 109 Filed 02/06/2006 Page 4 of 4 I hereby certify that a copy of the foregoing document was served upon counsel of record on February 6, 2006, by electronic and/or ordinary mail.
s/Carol A. Hemeyer Case Manager
4

