Foster-Bey v. Rubitschun
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan, Southern Division April 19, 2005, Decided CIVIL NO. 05-71318

Reporter: 2005 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 40135 KENNETH FOSTER-BEY, #142187, JOHN ALEXANDER, #163875, WAYMON KINCAID, #137927, WILLIAM SLEEPER, #116539, ROBERT WEISENAUER, #157085, ERIC MCCULLUM, #120287, GERALD LEE HESSEL, #150163, Plaintiffs, v. JOHN S. RUBITSCHUN, ET AL., Defendants.

For Maurice Jones, Intervenor Plaintiff, Pro se, Marensico, MI.
For Gilberto Osequeda, Intervenor Plaintiff, Pro se, Freeland, [*2] MI US.

Subsequent History: Motion granted by, in part, Motion denied by, in part, Dismissed by, in part Foster-Bey v. Rubitschun, 2005 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 40869 ( E.D. Mich., Aug. 18, 2005)
Counsel: [*1] For Kenneth Foster, John Alexander, Waymon Kincaid, William Sleeper, Robert Weisenauer, Eric McCullum, Gerald Hessell, Plaintiffs: Paul D. Reingold, University of Michigan, Clinical Law Program, Ann Arbor, MI.
For Anthony Lynch, Consol Plaintiff, Pro se, New Haven, MI.
For James Clark, Consol Plaintiff, Pro se, Saginaw, MI.
For Holley Davis, Consol Plaintiff, Pro se, Detroit, MI.
For Johnathan Martin, Consol Plaintiff, Pro se, Freeland, MI.
For Billy Ray Abernathy, Consol Plaintiff, Pro se, Saginaw, MI.
For Brian Hagood, Consol Plaintiff, Pro se, Saginaw, MI.

For Roderick Walker, Intervenor Plaintiff, Pro se, Muskegon, MI US.
For John S. Rubitschun, in his/her official capacity as member of the Michigan Parole Board, James Atterberry, in his/her official capacity as member of the Michigan Parole Board, Miguel Berrios, in his/her official capacity as member of the Michigan Parole Board, Charles Braddock, in his/her official capacity as member of the Michigan Parole Board, Stephen DeBoer, in his/her official capacity as member of the Michigan Parole Board, Enid Livingston, in his/her official capacity as member of the Michigan Parole Board, James Quinlan, in his/her official capacity as member of the Michigan Parole Board, Marianne Samper, in his/her official capacity as member of the Michigan Parole Board, Barbara Sampson, in his/her official capacity as member of the Michigan Parole Board, Artina Hartman, in his/her official capacity as member of the Michigan Parole Board, Patricia L. Caruso, in her official capacity as director of the Michigan Department of Corrections, Defendants: Frank J. Monticello, Kevin R. Himebaugh, Leo H. Friedman, Michigan Department of Attorney General, Lansing, MI.

For Brian Luckett, Consol Plaintiff, Pro se, Saginaw, MI.

Judges: Nancy G. Edmunds, United [*3] States District Judge.

For Timothy Ganderson, Consol Plaintiff, Pro se, Saginaw, MI.

Opinion by: Nancy G. Edmunds

For Giovanni Cipriano, Intervenor Plaintiff, Pro se, Freeland, MI.
For Ralph Cobb, Intervenor Plaintiff, Pro se, Freeland, MI US.

Opinion
ORDER GRANTING IN PART AND DENYING IN PART PLAINTIFFS' MOTIONS TO PROCEED IN FORMA PAUPERIS PURSUANT TO 28 U.S.C. § 1915(g)

For Melvin Gunn, Intervenor Plaintiff, Pro se, Freeland, MI.
For Henry Hill, Intervenor Plaintiff, Pro se, Freeland, MI.
For William Jenkins, Intervenor Plaintiff, Pro se, Freeland, MI.

Plaintiffs are state prisoners currently in the custody of the Michigan Department of Corrections. Through counsel, they have filed a civil rights complaint pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983. Plaintiffs have filed individual applications to proceed in forma pauperis pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1915(a).

2005 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 40135, *3

Page 2 of 2

Plaintiffs must pay the full filing fee for this civil action. 28

U.S.C. § 1915(b)(1). Each prisoner is proportionally liable for If Plaintiff Hessel fails to pay the $ 35.71 filing fee within

any fees and costs that may be assessed. In re Prison thirty days from the date of this Order, each remaining

Litigation Reform Act, 105 F.3d 1131, 1138 (6th Cir. 1997). Plaintiff will be responsible for a recalculated, proportionate

Thus, any fees and costs for this action must be equally share of the full filing fee. If Plaintiff Hessel does not prepay

divided among the seven plaintiffs. Id. Accordingly, each the filing fee, the Court will issue an Amended Order holding

Plaintiff is liable for $ 35.71 of the $ 250.00 filing fee.

each remaining Plaintiff liable for his recalculated,

proportionate share of the full filing fee, increased by $ 5.95.

The Court concludes from the financial date before it that

Plaintiff Hessel has not established indigence and is able to Typically, when the Court grants a plaintiffs request

prepay the filing fee for this action. Plaintiff Hessel [*4] has to [*6] proceed in forma pauperis, the Court directs the

a current spendable account balance of $ 502.49. Therefore, United States Marshal to effect service without prepayment of

the Court denies Plaintiff Hessel's application to proceed in costs for such service. In this case, counsel has represented to

forma pauperis. Accordingly, Plaintiff Hessel must pay his the Court that counsel will effect service.

portion of the $ 250.00 filing fee, $ 35.71, within thirty days from the date of this Order. Failure to do so will result in the dismissal of Plaintiff Hessel from this action.

Accordingly, the Court GRANTS Plaintiffs Foster-Bey, Alexander, Kincaid, Sleeper, Weisenauer, and McCullum's applications to proceed in forma pauperis and ORDERS the

The Court has reviewed the remaining Plaintiffs' financial agency having custody of Plaintiffs Foster-Bey, Alexander, affidavits, and certified account statements or their equivalent. Kincaid, Sleeper, Weisenauer, and McCullum to: (1)

Having considered these items, the Court grants Plaintiffs withdraw or set aside the initial partial filing fee from

Foster-Bey, Alexander, Kincaid, Sleeper, Weisenauer, and plaintiffs' trust fund accounts; (2) forward this amount to the

McCullum's applications to proceed without prepayment of Clerk of this Court within thirty (30) days of the date of this

the filing fee for this action. 28 U.S.C. § 1915(a)(1). The order; and (3) in subsequent months, or from time to time,

Court must assess and, if funds exist, collect from these forward payments of twenty percent (20%) of the preceding Plaintiffs' accounts an initial partial filing fee, consisting of month's income credited to plaintiffs' accounts to the Clerk of

twenty percent (20%) of the greater of (1) the average this Court until each plaintiff has paid his individual and

monthly deposits to each plaintiffs account, or (2) the average total sum of $ 35.71 to complete the entire filing fee of $

monthly balance in each plaintiffs account for the preceding 250.00. The Court will notify the agency having custody of

six (6) months. 28 U.S.C. § 1915(b).

plaintiffs when plaintiffs have paid the entire filing fee.

The initial partial filing fee for Kenneth Foster-Bey is $ 2.00. The initial [*5] partial filing fee for John Alexander is $ 16.00. The initial partial filing fee for Waymon Kincaid is $ 0.00. The initial partial filing fee for William Sleeper is $ 1.00. The initial partial filing fee for Robert Weisenauer is $ 3.00. The initial partial filing fee for Eric McCullum is $ 17.00.After plaintiffs pay their initial partial filing fees, each plaintiff is equally and separately liable for the proportional total sum of $ 35.71, and they must make monthly payments of twenty percent (20%) of the preceding month's income credited to their accounts until the total sum of $ 35.71 has been paid. 28 U.S.C. § 1915(b)(2).

The Court DENIES Plaintiff Hessel's Motion to Proceed In Forma [*7] Pauperis and ORDERS Plaintiff Hessel to prepay $ 35.71, his portion of the filing fee, within thirty days from the date of this Order.
SO ORDERED.
S/Nancy G. Edmunds
United States District Judge
Dated: April 19, 2005

