2:0C5a-csve-:70183-1183-7M1OB-DVoMcMumeDnot:c0#0621679348F9ile1d2 11/F1i8le/d0:911P/1g81/2o0f049 PPgaIgDe:31814

No. 08-1371; 08-1372; 08-1626
UISIITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT

KENNETH FOSTER, et a!.,

)

Plaintiffs-Appellees,

)

)

v.

)

) SHAREE BOOKER, in her official capacity as a )

member of the Michigan Parole Board, et al.,

)

)

Defendants-Appellants.

)

)

NOV 1 8 2009 LEONARD GREEN, Clerk

BEFORE: KENNEDY and ROGERS, Circuit Judges; HOOD, District Judge.* The defendants appeal the district court’s grant ofsummary judgment for the plaintiffs in this
civil rights action alleging that the retroactive application of changes to the State of Michigan’s parole laws violates the Ex Post Facto Clause ofthe United States Constitution. The defendants now move to stay (1) the district court’s original injunctive order; (2) the district court’s subsequent order, issued on November 3, 2009, in response to the defendants’ second remedial report; and (3) all further district court proceedings pending resolution ofthe case on appeal. The plaintiffs oppose the defendants’ motion for a stay.
When deciding whether to grant a motion for a stay pending appeal, this court considers the following four factors: (1) the movant’s likelihood of success on the merits of the appeal; (2) the likelihood of irreparable harm to the movant if the motion for a stay is denied; (3) the likelihood of harm to others if the motion for a stay is granted; and (4) whether the public interest weighs in favor

*The Honorable Joseph M. Hood, United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Kentucky, sitting by designation.

2:0C5a-csve-:70183-1183-7M1OB-DVoMcMumeDnot:c0#0621679348F9ile1d2 11/F1i8le/d0:911P/1g82/2o0f049 PPgaIgDe:32815
Nos. 08-1371, 08-1372; 08-1626 Foster v. Booker of granting a stay. Mich. Coal. ofRadioactive Material Users, Inc. v. Griepentrog, 945 F.2d 150, 153 (6th Cir. 1991) (citation omitted). None of these factors, taken alone, is a “prerequisite[] that must be met”; rather, these four factors “are interrelated considerations that must be balanced together.” Id. (citation omitted).
This court decided previously, after consideration of each of the defendants’ two earlier motions, that a stay of the district court’s original injunctive order was not warranted. In both instances, this court indicated, however, that “[s]hould the district court impose the ‘more drastic and intrusive relief’ that the defendants fear, they may renew their motion for a stay.” The district court’s November 3, 2009, order imposes significant additional requirements upon the defendants. In particular, the requirement that a prisoner’s complete psychological reports be attached to the prisoner’s parole summary and made available for review online by all Parole Board members before they vote “imposes a substantial burden. .. and requires implementation of a practice that
was not required, implemented or utilized prior to 1992.” Sampson Aff. ¶ 24, Nov. 2, 2009. Indeed,
even the plaintiffs noted that the “psychological records may be burdensome to compile.” Pis. Appellees’ Resp. 6.
The defendants have demonstrated a sufficient likelihood of success on the merits, when considered with the other factors, to warrant a stay of the district court’s most recent order. Moreover, the defendants have shown a sufficient likelihood of irreparable harm because compliance with the district court’s most recent order will require a significant expenditure of time and money. The public interest also weighs in favor of granting a stay of the district court’s most recent order until this court decides the issues on appeal. Finally, it is unlikely that the plaintiffs will
-2-

2:0C5a-csve-:70183-1183-7M1OB-DVoMcMumeDnot:c0#0621679348F9ile1d2 11/F1i8le/d0:911P/1g83/2o0f049 PPgaIgDe:33816 Nos. 08-1371; 08-1372, 08-1 626 Foster v. Booker suffer significant harm if this court grants the defendants’ motion for a stay of the district court’s most recent order but the original injunctive order remains in effect.
Accordingly, the defendants’ motion for a stay of the district court’s November 3, 2009, “Order on the Defendants’ Second Remedial Report” is GRANTED. For the reasons provided in our orders filed on October 30, 2008, and November 18, 2008, however, the defendants’ motion for a stay of the district court’s original injunctive order and all further district court proceedings pending resolution of the case on appeal is DENIED.
ENTERED BY ORDER OF THE COURT. Leonard Green Clerk
-3-

2:0C5a-csve-:70183-1183-7M1OB-DVoMcMumeDnot:c0#0621679348F9ile1d3 11/F1i8le/d0:911P/1g84/2o0f049 PPgaIgDe:31817

Leonard Green Clerk

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
100 EAST FIFTH STREET, ROOM 540 POTTER STEWART U.S. COURTHOUSE
CINCINNATI, OHIO 45202-3988

Tel. (513) 564-7000 www.ca6.uscourts.gov

Filed: November 18, 2009

Mr. Kevin R. Himebaugh Office of the Michigan Attorney General P.O. Box 30217 Lansing, MI 48909
Mr. Paul D. Reingold Michigan Clinical Law Program 801 Monroe Street Suite 363 Legal Research Building Ann Arbor, MI 48109
Re: Case No. 08-1371/08-1372/08-1626, Kenneth Foster, et al v. Sharee Booker, et al Originating Case No. : 05-71318
Dear Sir or Madam,
The Court issued the enclosed (Order/Opinion) today in this case.
Sincerely yours,

cc: Mr. David J. Weaver Enclosure

s/Yvonne Henderson Case Manager Direct Dial No. 513-564-7031 Fax No. 513-564-7096

