... '1}.
Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 1 of 50

RECEIVED

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT EASTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN
SOUTHERN DIVISION

APR ... 5 2005
Clerk's Offloe

Bt-;hit5

1-1 U.S. District Court ArlnArbor. MI

KENNETH FOSTER-BEY, JOHN ALEXANDER, WAYMON KINCAID, WILLIAM SLEEPER, ROBERT WEISENAUER, ERIC MCCULLUM, GERALD LEE HESSEL, on behalf of themselves and all others similarl y situated,
Plaintiffs,
VS.
JOHN S. RUBITSCHUN, Chair, .lAMES ATTERBERRY, MIGUEL BERRlOS, CHARLES BRADDOCK, STEPHEN DEBOER, ENID LIVINGSTON, JAMES QUINLAN, MARIANNE SAMPER, BARBARA SAMPSON, ARTINA HARTMAN, individually and in their of11cial capacities as members of the Michigan Parole Board, and PATRICIA L. CARUSO, individually and in her ofIicial capacity as director of the Michigan Department of Corrections,

05-71318
File No. ___________
Han. NANLY G. EDMUNDS
u.s Mag, Judge VIRGINIA MORGAN
FILED
APR - 5 2005
CLERK'S OFFICE U.S. DISTRICT COURT
ANN ARBOR, MI

Defendants.
-------~------------------/
CLASS ACTION COMPLAINT

The plaintiffs, by their counsel, state the following tbr their complaint:

Introduction

1. This is an action for declaratory and injunctive relief under 42 U.S.C. § 1983.

TIle plaintiffs are prisoners in the custody of the Michigan Department of Corrections (MDOC)

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 2 of 50
who were convicted before October 1, 1992, and who were sentenced to parolable life. 2. The plaintitTs seek relief for the derendants' retroactive use of substantive parole
standards that were not in effect when the plaintiffs were convicted, in violation of the ex post facto and due process clauses of the United States Constitution.
3. Specifically, aller October 1, 1992, the Michigan parole board adopted a policy that "life means life." The new policy precludes meaningful parole review tor parolable lifers and effectively converts their sentences to mandatory life terms.
4. The plaintiffs also seek relief for the defendants' retroactive use of parole laws and policies that were not in effect when the plaintiffs were convicted. The cumulative changes
have created a different parole regime, in violation of the ex post facto and due process clauses of
the United States Constitution. S. The changed standards, laws, and policies have deprived the plaintiffs of effective
parole consideration, have created a parole system for liters in which the parole board no longer exercises discretion in individual cases, and have made a parolable life sentence the equivalent of a mandatory life sentence in Michigan.
6. The changed standards, laws, and policies all but guarantee that the plaintiff's will never be paroled, or will not be paroled until years later than they would have been paroled under the substantive parole standards and the laws and policies that were in effect when the plaintiffs were convicted.
7. The plaintiffs do not seek their release. Instead they seek parole consideration using the substantive stalldards and the law and policy protections that were in effect when the plaintiffs were convicted.
2

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 3 of 50

Conditions Precedent to this Action

8. The plaintiffs, by previously having filed this complaint in the form ofadministra-

tive grievances, which were denied at Steps I, IT, and III of the MDOC grievance process, have satisfied the pre-filing requirements of the Prison Litigation Reform Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1997e(a).

See Exhibits 1-8, attached.

Jurisdiction and Venue

9. Jurisdiction is conferred on this Court by 28 U.S.C. § 1331, which authorizes

federal courts to decide cases concerning federal questions, and by 28 U.S.C. § I 343(a), which

authorizes federal courts to hear civil cases brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983.
10. Pursuant to the recent case or Wilkinson v. Dolson, u.s. _ , 2005 WL
516415 (317/05), challenges to parole procedures are permitted to be brought under § 1983.

I 1. Venue is proper in this Court because the defendants conduct their business across

the state., including in the Eastern District. In addition, some of the named plaintitTs and many of

the proposed class members are in custody in the Eastern District of Michigan. Thus their claims

arise in (he Eastern Dis(rict as well.

Parties

The Plaintiffs

12. PlaintiffKenne(h Foster-Bey is an inmate (#142187) in the custody of the MDOC

at the Ryan Correctional Facility in Dctroit, Michigan.

13. Plaintiff John Alexander is an inmate (#163875) in the custody of the MDOC at

the Gus Harrison Correctional Facility in Adrian, Michigan.

14. PlaintiffWaymon Kincaid is an inmate (#137927) in thc custody orthe MDOC at

the Marquette Branch Prison in Marquette, Mk,higan.

3

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 4 of 50
15. Plaintiff William Sleeper is an inmate (#116539) in the custody of the MDOe at the Macomb Correc.(ional Facility ill New Haven, Michigan.
16. Plaintiff Robert Weisenaueris an inmate (#157085) in the custody of the MDOC at the Thumb Correctional Facility in Lapeer, Michigan.
17. Plaintiff Eric McCullum is an inmate (#120287) in the custody of the MDOC at the Mound Correctional Facility in Detroit, Michigan.
18. Plaintiff Gerald Lee Hessell is an inmate (#150163) in the custody of the MDOC at the Carson City Correctional Facility in Carson City, Michigan.
Class Allegations 19. The proposed class definition, as set forth in the accompanying motion, is: All parolable lifers in the custody of the Michigan Department of Corrections who were convicted before October I, 1992, and whose parole the "new" parole board has denied, passed over, expressed no interest in pursuing, or otherwise rejected or deferred. 20. The class is so numerous that joinder of all members is impraclicab1c. 21. There are questions of law and fact common to the class. 22. The claims of the named plaintiffs ate typical of the claims of the class members. 23. The named plaintiffs will fairly and adequately protect the interests of the class. 24. Class counsel have the time, resources, and expertise to represent the class. 25. lfthe Michigan parole board had applied the snbstantive parole standards and the parole laws and policies that were in effect when the plaintiffs were convicted, they would have been paroled long ago, and/or they would have a reasonable chance for parole within 12-20 years of incarceration. 26. Even if their parole remained uncertain, their parole is being decided under substantive parole standards and under parole laws and policies that were not in etl'ect when they
4

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 5 of 50
were convicted, that deprive them of meaningful parole review, and that effectively guarantee the denial of their parole.
The Defendants 27. Defendant John S. Rubi1.sehun is the chainnan of the Michigan parole board. 28. Defendants James Atterberry, Miguel13errios, Charles Braddock, Stephen De-
Boer, Enid Livingston, James Quinlan, Mariarme Samper, Barbara Sampson, and Arlina Hart-
man are members of the Michigan parole board. 29. The Michigan parole board, under the authority ofMCL 791.234, decides which
Michigan prisoners lo parole, and when to parole them. 30. Defendant Patricia L. Caruso is the director of the Michigan Department of Cor-
rcctions. In that capacity she has authority over the Michigan parole board. MCL 791.231 (a). Factual AlIce;ations of Named Plaintiff Kenneth Foster-Bey
31. Kenneth Foster-Bey was convicted in Detroit Recorder's Court of two counts of second-degree murder, MCL 750.317, in 1975. For these convictions, on July 16, 1975, Judge
Robert J. Columbo sentenced Mr. Foster-Bey to two concurrent life sentences with the possibil-
ity of parole. 32. Under MCL 791.234, in 1975, a recipient of a parolable life sentence came within
the jurisdiction of the parole board (and thus was eligible for parole) after ten years in prison. 33. In 1975, rehabilitated prisoners serving parolable life sentences were routinely
paroled within 12-20 years. 34. At Mr. FostercBey's sentencing hearing, Judge Colombo told Mr. Foster-Bey: This offense is parolable within ten years. [I' you become rehabilitated within that period oftime, I state publicly here on the record that I have no objection to your parole. I state that because I may not be here in ten years, but any judge who is looking at this record will know what I had in mind at the time I sentenced you.
5

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 6 of 50
In 1975, in deciding whether or not to grant parole to a parolable lifer after ten
years, the parole board used essentially the same substantive standards that it used for prisoners who had been sentenced to long indeterminate terms (like 25-40 years).
36. During (he time of his confinement, Mr. Foster-Bey has compiled an exemplary
record of achievement, including attainment of a G.E.D. in 1982, an associate's degree in 1985, a
bachelor's degree in 1993, and nearly 50 certificates and awards recognizing various social and vocational aptitudes.
37. By the time of his first parole review, Mr. Foster-Bey had demonstrated enough
rehabilitation and maturation that his warden (Gary Wells) requested special parole for him. 38. Mr. Foster-Bey has long had ajob assured him upon his release from prison.
39. The Honorable Robert J. Columbo, Mr. Foster-Bey's sentencing judge, wrote a
letter to Mr. Foster-Bey on July 24, 2001. In that letter, Judge Columbo stated: At the time of sentencing not only I, but the va~t majority of trial judges in the State of Michigan were aware that by imposing life ~entences rather than determinative sentences of minimums and maximums, the Michigan Parole Board at that time was able to parole defendants who had made substantial progress toward rehabilitation upon completion of a term of tcn years. It was with that in mind that I imposed a sentence of Life for Second Degree in the case of Mr. Foster.... The reason 1did this was also to encourage Mr. Foster to take advantage of all the programs (he Corrections Department had for selt~ improvement which apparently Mr. Foster has done with outstanding success. . .. Mr. Foster is caught in the middle of it having served now over 27 years for a crime that I never would have intended him (0 serve that long.... Moreover, I would never have sentenced Mr. Foster to a term of more than two concurrent (erms of25 to 30 years.... Mr. Kenneth Foster is serving a sentence of life which the Parole Board now treats as life, sonl<lthing this sentenl'lng Judge never expected or intended to happen when he sentenced him in 1975. 40. Since 1994, the Michigan parole board has denied parole for Mr. Foster-Bey. At
cach review it has either (a) exercised no discretion at all, but simply passed on his case because
of his status as a lifer, or (b) retroactively applied substantive standards and parole laws and poli-
6

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 7 of 50

cies that were not in effect when Mr. Foster-Bey was convicted, and that are far more stringent

than the standards, laws, and policies that were in effect in 1975.

41. Mr. Foster-Bey has now served over 30 years in prison. Under current board

policy he has no realistic chance for parole. Factual Allegations of Named Plaintiff .John Alexander

42. Plaintiff John Alexander was convicted of second-degree murder, MeL 750.317, and felony firearm posses~ion, MeL 750.227b, in 1981. For these convictions, on March 25,

1981, Judge Michael F. Sapala sentenced Mr. Alexander to parolable life plus a two-year term

for the weapons charge. 43. At Mr. Alexander's sentencing hearing, Judge Sapala told Mr. Alexander:

I'm going to leave the detem1ination of release to the parole board by the sentence that I will fashion. If you show them the kind of progress some ycars downlhe line that indicates that you should be released, they will release you. But 1 will leave it up to their discretion.
44. During the time of his confinement, Mr. Alexander has compilcd an excellent

record of educational, social, emotional, and vocational growth. 45. In 200 I, Mr. Alexander tiled a motion for fe-sentencing under MeR 6.500, the

state habeas provision for collateral attacks on convictions.
46. Onl'v1arch 13,2002, Judge Sapala, Mr. Alexander's original senlencingjudge,

granted the motion and agreed to re-sentence him to an indeterminate term of years, so that he

would no longer be effectively precluded from paroie eligibility because of his parolable lifer

status. 47.

Judge Sapala stated his reasons for granting relief as follows:

Obviously, in 1981, no judge, in imposing a life sentence, could see down the road, ifI could put it this way, that the Parole Board would change to the extentlhat it wouldn't simply change policies, but, in fact, would ignore the law.... It was clearly my intent in

7

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 8 of 50

this case ... that I intended that should Mr. Alexander be in a position to show the Parole Board that he should be released, that he should be. That was my intention.... [I]f I wanted to make sure he stayed in prison the rest of his life, I would have imposed those kinds of sentenccs ... like 80 to 150 years, but I did not do that. ... [W]e can say with confidence this man will not be released under the current policy of the Parole Board. That's contrary to this Judge's sentence.
48. Judge Sapala's decision to rc-scntence Mr. Alexander was reversed on appeal by
the Michigan Court of AppeaJs, based on People v. Moore, 468 Mich. 573 (2003), which held

that, as a matter of stclle law, state trial courts lacked jurisdiction to re-sentence parolable lifers.

49. Since 1994, the parole board has dcnied parole for Mr. Alexander. Each time it
has either (a) exercised no discretion at all, but simply passed on his case because of his status as

a lifer, or (b) retroactively applied substantive standards and parole laws and policies that were not in effect when Mr. Alexander was convicted, and that are 1ill more stringent than the stan-

dards, laws, and policies that were in cffect in 1981 . 50. Mr. Alexandcr has now served ovcr 23 years in prison. Under current board

policy he has 110 realistic chance for parole. .Factual Allegations of Named Plaintiff William Sleeper

51. Mr. Sleeper pled guilty to sccond-degree murder, MeL 750.317, in 1966, when

he was 17 years old. Although he had no prior criminaJ record, he was sentenced to parolable

life. 52.

Mr. Sleeper's last disciplinary misconduct report in prison was written in August

of 1967. 53.

For much of the 1970s and early 1980s, Mr. Sleeper was assigned to trustee divi-

sions of the state prison system. 54. For scveral years he served as the imnate fire chief for the Jackson facilities. In

that capacity he had access to the prison lire trucks and regularly drove without supervision on

8

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 9 of 50
public roads. 55. He also worked as a chef at a restaurant in Brighton, as a scale operator at the
Grass Lake weigh station on [-94, as a sidewalk paver for the Department of Natural Resources, and as a driver for the MDOe.
56. In every setting, his work reports were excellent and he was rewarded with more and more responsibility; in some ofthcse jobs he drove unsupervised all aCross the state.
57. Tn 1984, lifers were barred from prison work-release programs. 58. Mr. Sleeper has completed nearly every prison educational and rehabilitation program that it is possible for an inmate to complete. 59. On July 11, 1974, aller eight years in prison, Mr. Sleeper was told that he would be recommended for "positive action" by the parole board at the end often years. 60. In 1976, a board member told him thaI he would be paroled at 15 years. 61. On May 26, 1988, in executive session, the full parole board voted unanimously (5-0) that Mr. Sleeper's parole should go forward to public hearing. 62. For unexplained reasons - what was later described as a "clerical error" - the public hearing was never scheduled. 63. In 1992, Mr. Sleeper's warden personally contacted the parole board to try to gel the publie hearing process started. 64. In July 1992, the full board again voted (5-0) to proceed to public hearing, and told Mr. Sleeper thai it would "begin active processing of your case in thc next few months." 65. In the interiw, tbe "new" parole board, created by the October 1, 1992, amend· ments to the parole law, came into being, and the parole process for parolable liters was stalled. 66. The "new" board vetoed his parole and gave him a five-year tlop.
9

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 10 of 50
In 1998, (he board expressed "no interest" and gave him a five-year flop. 68. In 2003, the board expressed "no interest" and gave him a five-year flop. Mr. Sleeper is not scheduled for parole review again until February 2008. 69. Since 1994, the parole board has denied parole for Mr. Sleeper. Each time it has either (a) exercised no discretion at all, but simply passed on his case because of his status as a lifer, or (b) retroactively applied substantive standards and parole laws and policies that were not in effect when Mr. Sleeper was convicted, and that are far more stringent than the standards, laws, and policies that were in effect in 1966. 70. Mr. Sleeper has now served over 38 years in prison. Under current board policy he has no realistic chance for parole.
Factual Allegations on Behalf of the Other Named Plaintiffs 71. The four additional named plaintiffs all have facts similar to those of Mr. FosterBey, Mr. Kincaid, and Mr. Sleeper. (To avoid repetition, their specific facts will be reserved.) 72. Since 1994, the parole board has denied them parole. Each tinlc the board has either (a) exercised no discretion at all, but simply passed on their cases because of their status as lifers, or (b) retroactively applied substantive standards and parole laws and policies that were not in effect when they were convicted, and that are far more stringent than the standards, laws, and policies that were in effect when they were convicted. 73. Cumulatively, Messrs. Kincaid, Weiscnauer, McCullum, and Hessell have now served approximately 119 years in prison - 29 years apiece on average. Under current board policy they have no realistic chance for parole. 74. All of the named plaintiffs have superb institutional records. But Ibr the board's ref\L~alto exercise discretion, or but for the retroactive application of the post-1994 substantive
10

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 11 of 50
parole standards, and but for the retroactive application of the cumulative changes (0 Michigan's parole laws and policies, the named plaintiffs would havc been paroled by 2005.
Factual Allegations on Behalf of the Proposed Class Changes iu Substantive Parole Standards
75. Under Michigan law, all members of the proposed class came within the jurisdiction 0 f the parole board after ten years of incarceration.
76. At the same time, prisoners with long indeterminate sentences (like 25-40 years) were not eligible for parole under Michigan law until they had served their mandatory minimum (e.g., 25 years) less good time.
77. As a result of this anomaly in the law, parolable lifers became subject to parole
review, and could in fact be paroled, sooner than prisoners serving long indeterminate sentences.
78. Up until 1993-94, in deciding whether or not parolable lifers should go forward in the parole process (10 he paroled), the hoard used essentially the same substantive standards for parolable liters that it used in making the parole decisions for prisoners serving long indeterminate sentences who had completed their mandatory minimum, less "good time."
79. Throughout the period when the proposed plaintiff class committed their crimes, the parole board routinely paroled rehabilitated parolable lifers within 12-20 years.
80. This was so precisely because parolable Wers got before the parole board sooner than long term-of-years prisoners, and because the parole board used essentially the same substantive standards with both groups of prisoners in deciding whom to parole.
81. Indeed, for a parolable lifer to serve 20-25 years would have been viewed as an
unusually long sentence, reserved tbr someone who had adjusted poorly to prison, or who had other signitlcant problems in his or her file, apart from the fact of the parolahle life sentence.
I I

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 12 of 50
82. Beginning in 1993-94, and continuing to the present day, the Michigan parole board radically altered the substantive standards it used to decide parolable lifer cases.
83. Beginning in 1993·94, and continuing to the present day, the parole board adopted an explicit poliey that "life means life."
84. Under the "new" board's substantive standards, it almost never grants parole to parolable lifers, except for tenninally ill prisoners, or as a reward for heroic acts like saving the Ii re of a corrections officer.
85. From 1994 to the pres.,nt, the parole board has essentially eonflated the meaning of parolable life and mandatory life in Michigan.
86. As a result, the parole board has stopped exercising its discretion in parolable lifer cases, because the fact of the parolable Ii f'e sentence alone dictates the result in nearly every case.
87. Tn some cases co-defendants were charged with the same crime. The more culpable person was sentenced to mandatory life or was given a very long term-of-years sentence (like 60-80 years), while the less culpable person was given a reduced sentence of parolable life.
88. Under the board's post-l 994 substantive standards, the two are now treated the same, or in some cases the more culpable defendant may be released before the parolable lifer.
89. The radical change in the parole board's substantive standards was intended to increase retroactively the punislmlent for the crimes committed by the plaintiff class, without regard to the norms of practice in place - as understood hy prosecutors, judges, probation departments, defense counsel, the public, and the defendants themselves - when the members of the plaintiff class were convicted.
90. The radical change in the parole board's substantive standards has retroactively increased the punishment for the crimes committed by the plaintiff class.
12

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 13 of 50
Changes in Parole Law and Policl: 91. Beiore October 1, 1992, by law or policy, most ofthe proposed class members were entitled to parole review starting in the fourth or seventh year of incarceration that is, even before the prisoner came within the formal jurisdiction of the board (after the tenth year). 92. The purpose of the pre-parole review was for the board 10 get to know the prisoner and for the prisoner to learn - even before coming within the parole board's formal jurisdiction - what the board wanted the prisoner 10 do in order to maximize his or her chances for parole. 93. Due to a mushrooming prison population and an overworked parole board, many members ofthe proposed class never got the required lifer hearings that they were supposed to get during the first len years oftheir incarceration. 94. Before October 1, 1992, by law or policy, the proposed class members were elltilled to parole review after ten years of incarceration no less frequently than every other year. 95. Today, Michigan's parolc laws and policies have changed to reduce the frequency of review for parolable lifers to every five years instead of every two years. l 96. Before October I, 1992, by law or policy, Ihe proposed class members were entitled to parole review that included an in-person hearing with a member of the parole board. 97. Today, Michigan's parole laws ami policies have changed so thaI the parole board need not ever meet personally with parolable lifers, but instead can conduct file or paper reviews. 98. Before October I, 1992, by law or policy, all proposed class members were entitled to written reasons for the denial ofparolc ifthe board expresscd "no interest" in moving the prisoner forward to a public hearing, or otherwise rejected the prisom:r's parole.
I This change - in and of itsclf- was held not 1.0 violate the ex post facto clause, on t.he proofs available as of1997. See Shabazz v. (iahry, 123 FJd 909 (6th CiT. 1997), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1120 (1998).
13

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 14 of 50
99. Today, the parole board's expression of no interest, or a pass-over, does not require written reasons.
100. Belorc October 1, 1992, by law or policy, all proposed class members were entitled to parole review in which a statement of no interest or a pass-over was considered to be a fonnal decision of the board, namely a denial of parole.
101. Today, the parole board's expression of no interest or a pass-over is not viewed as a denial of parole; indeed, it is not even viewed as a decision or the board.
102. Before October 1, 1992, by law or policy, the proposed class members were entitled to parole review in which a statement of no interest or a pass-over was subject to judicial review in state circuit court, with I'urthcr appeal available to the state appellate courts.
103. Today, the parole board's expression of no interest or a pass-over is not subject to judicial review of any kind in any state court, except that the prosecutor or the victim can appeal a parole decision in the prisoner's favor.
104. Before October I, 1992, the parole board was established as an independent entity subject to state civil service rules, which insulated it from political influence.
105. Today, the parole board is under the direct authority of an executive department, subject to political influence.
106. All of the change~ described above were applied retroactively to the plaintiffs. 107. All of the changes described above were intended (a) to lengthen the prison sentences of the plaintiff class, (b) to limit the discretion ofthe parole board, and (c) to take parole policy out orthc hands of an autonomous body (insulated from political inlluence) and to place it instead in an executive department (subject to political influence). 108. All of the changes described above had the effect of (a) lengthening the prison
14

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 15 of 50
sentences of the plaintiff class, (b) limiting the discretion oftha parole board, and (c) taking parole policy out of the hands of an autonomous body (insulated from political influence) and placing it directly in an executive department (subject to political influence).
109. The combined cumulative changes in the state's suhstantive parole standards and in the state's parole laws and policies have deprived the plaintiffs of the opportunities for meaningful parole review that they were promised when they committed their crimes and were sentenced.
110. The combined cumulative changes in the state's substantive parole standards and in the state's parole laws and policies have increased the sentences of the named plaintiffs by up to 12 years (and counting), and have made the plaintiff class effectively ineligible for parole.
Irreparable Harm 111. The named plaintiffs and the proposed plaintiff class have suffered irreparable harm, in that they are subject to substantive parole standards and parole laws and policies that are far more stringent than were in effect when they were convicted. 112. The retroactive changes in Michigan's substantive parole standards and in the state's parole laws and policies make it nearly impossible for these prisoners (0 be paroled, with the result that (hey have served, arc serving, and will serve sentences far longer than what their sentencing judges intended or anticipated.
Relit ted Cases 113. Plaintiffs Waymon Kincaid and John Alexander have hab(!(.18 corpus petitions pending in this Court, raising substantially the same issues as are raised here. See Kincaid v. Jones, File No. 04-CV-71090-DT (Hon. Avem Cohn) and Alexander v. Birkett, File No. 04-CV73953-DT (Hon. Robert Cleland).
15

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 16 of 50
Claims Ex Post Facto Violations
114. The changes to Michigan's substantive parole standards and to the state's parole laws and policies, described above, ejfectively alter or extcnd the plaintiffs' prison terms, in vio-
lation of the expostfiJCto clause of the U.S. Constitution, Article 1, Section 10, Clause 1. Due Pl'Ocess Violations
115. The changes to Michigan's substantive parole standards and to the state's parole laws and policies, described above, could not havc been foreseen by the state court trial judges when they sentenced the plaintiffs.
116. Where state court trial judges sentenced the plaintiffs under one parole regime, and where a far different regime came into effect years latcr and was applied retroactively, and where the state supreme court has denied all state-law bascd relief, the plaintiffs rights have been
violated undcrthe due process clause of the U.S. Constitution, Amendment XIV.
117. The changes to Michigan's substantive parole standards and to the state's parole laws and policies, described above, have deprived the plaintiffs of meaningful parole review, and have resulted in a system in which the parole board no longer exercises discretion in lifer cases,
in violation of the due process clause of the U.S. Constitution, Amendment XIV.
Relief Requested Wherefore, the plaintiffs, on behalf ofthemsel ves and the plaintiff class, ask the Court to: (a) certify this action as a class action, pursuant to the accompanying 111otion; (b) enter declaratory relief finding that the defendants' retroactive use ofthe post-1992
substantive parole standards, combined with the defendants' retroactive use of the
cumulative post-1992 changes to Mic,higan's parole laws and policies, violates the ex
poSI,!{lCto and due process clauses ofthe U. S. Constitution;
16

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 17 of 50

(e) enter injunctive relief barring the defendants from using the post-1992 substantive
parole standards and the cumulative changes to the state's parole laws and policies, as
applied to the named plaint! rts and the plainIi ff class;

(d) order the defendants [0 conduct new parole hearings for the named plaintiffs and the plaintiff class, using the pre-1992 substantive parole standards and the parole laws and policies that were in effect when the plaintiffs committed their crimes;

(e) grant the plaintitTs their costs and reasonable attorneys' fees as permitted by federal law, including 42 U.S.C. § 1988; and

(1) grant such further relief as the Court deems fair and just.

Respectfully submitted,

MICHIGAN CLINICAL LAW PROGRAM
:v~::" ~iJJ)

By: Paul D. Reingold (P27594)

Attorney for Plaintiff

363 J.egal Research Building

80 I Monroe Street

Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1215

(734)~9
({Yb"1 /W,,£

~ 11. d 1

\) Rachcl'TUrow and Caleb Weiner

. Student Attorneys

Dated: April 4, 2005

17

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 18 of 50

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT EASTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN

REceIVED
APR - s 2005

SOUTHERN DIVISION

Clerk's Office U.S. District Court
Ann.Arbor, MI

KENNETH FOSTER-BEY, JOHN ALEXANDER, WAYMON KINCAID,

FileNo. _0_5_-_7_1_3_1 8

WILLIAM SLEEPER, ROBERT WEISENAUER,

. . HO_I!. ----'NANCt'="-'---=S:....;:E. D:;;:;.-M_U_N_DS_

ERlC MCCULLUM, GERALD LEE HESSEL,

U.S Mag. Judge VIRGINIA MORGAN

on behalf ofthemselves and all others

similarly situated,
VS.

Plaintiffs,

FILED

JOHN S. RUB1TSCHUN, Chair, JAMES ATTERBERRY, MIGUEL BERRlOS, CHARLES BRADDOCK, STEPHEN DEBOER, ENID LIVINGSTON, JAMES QUINLAN, MARlANNE SAMPER, BARBARA SAMPSON, ARTINA HARTMAN, individually and in their official capacities as members ofthe Michigan Parole Board, and PATRlCIA L. CARUSO, individually and in her official capacity as director of the Michigan Department of Corrections,

APR - 5 2005
CLERK'S OFFICE U.S. DISTRICT COURT
ANN ARBOR. MI

Defendants. _________________________1

EXHIBlTS FOR CLASS ACTION COMPLAINT

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 19 of 50
Index of Exhibits 1. Keruleth Foster-Dey's grievance, Step I - Step TIl, with responses 2. John Alexander's grievance, Step I Step Ill, with responses 3. Waymon Kincaid's !,'I'ievance, Step I Step III, with responses 4. William Sleeper's grievance, Step 1- Stcp ITT, with responses 5. Robert Weisenauer's grievancc, Step I - Step III, with responscs 6. Eric McCullum's grievance, Step I Step TTl, with responses 7. Gerald Lee Hessell's grievance, Step I - Step III, with rcsponses

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 20 of 50
/

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 21 of 50

MlCHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS
PRISONER/PAROLEE GRIEVANCE FORM
Date Received at Step I !JUL· 0 1 2004 Grievance Identifier:

483~-4247 10,94 CS]·247A

KENNETH A. FOSTER BEY

23 04

What attempt did you make to resolve this issue prior to writing this grievance? On what date? 01/08/2004 A.D. If none, explain why.

Grievant filed a "Request For Reconsideration Of: December 8. 2003. 'No
Interest' Decision". rendered by MDOe Parole Board.

State problem clearly. Use separate grievance form for each issue. Additional pages, using plain paper, may be used. Four copies of each page andsupponing documents must be submitted with this form. The grievance must be submitted to the Grievance Coordinator In accordance with the time limits of OP 03.02.130.

This grievance is being filed against the following state agencies and officials, in concert with the State Agency MDOC as followed:
MDOC Agency; former MDOC Director Mr. William S. Overton; MDOC Director Mrs. Patricia Carusol Michigan Governor Mrs. Jennifer M. Granholm; Michigan A'botorney G~neral Mr. Mike Cox; and, MDOC Parole Board, and its members individually, i.e., Chairman Mr. John S. Ruhitschun; Mr. Charles Braddock; Mr. William Slaughter; Ms. Marianne Samper; Mr. George Lellis; Mr. Miguel Berrios; Mr. James E. Atterbury;
Mr. James J. Quinlan; and, l'1s. Barbara S. Sampson.

Grievant files this grievance according to MDOC Policy Directives, namely PD-03.02.t30(E), and PD-06.0S.1'04(XX). The authority of this grievance is the violation of statutory law and MDOC policies, committed by the above named persons in their collective and individual "failure to follow the parole process as outlined in this [Le., PD-06.0S.1'04] and other policy directives may be ~rieved in accordance with PD-03.02.130 "prisoner/poralee~G~r=i~e~v~a~n~c~e~s~i~i.~I~_____________
(NOTE: SEE ATTACHED PAGES, HERETO).

RESPONSE (Grievant Interviewed? DYes [] No If No, give explanation. If resolved, explain resolution.)

P.D. 03.02.130 calls for grievances that are llOI1-grievab1.e not to be processed.

YO.u:: issue is the content of policy end therefore is llOI1-grievQble. FUrthemvre.

decisionS Illi'lde by the parole BoaI:d aId :r:eco.merrlations m:tde by its bearings officers

to gr;.mt. deny. res<:;ind. i'IIIeIld or revoke parole. or not to proceed with a lifer

interview or I11blic he<tting are non-grievable. and therefore your grievance is being
rejected. Please refer to P.D. 06';05.10!1 "Parole P.roc9!>S· for IIDre infoJllli3tian on

1lv the

I.e process.·

..

71# -::-C:CSi~-4'-=~ ;~,UlAf -=-j!.e\'7-'-'ie,w

1\

::::~~~~~~ce~Coo~:rd:i.nator

-:'1/~,~.~.-,.!.:JtLL...,--:--/-:"'-

_ _{I..6.L:....!!J{I1I,L/L-I_

Respondent's Name (pnnt)

Working Title

Reviewer's Name (Print)

Working Title

ly/bLJi DoratjeeRveatnu~rn7ed VI

If resolved at Step I, Grievant sign here. Resolution must be described ahove. r;G<:;ri"::ev:::a--nt"-·s:"<S;l"ig--n-cat"'ur=e--------- Date

DISTRffiuTloN!whitl. Gr~en\ Canary, Pink--Ptocess to Step One; Goldcnrod~~Gricvant

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 22 of 50

The challenge of this grievance, is that 'failure to follow

the parole process as outlined in the various policy directives'

(i.e.,

PD-06.05.100,

PD-06.05.103,

PD-06.05.104,

and,

1'D-06.05.105), relating to the processing of a parole release

in a "parolable" lifer case. In other words, the release on parole

according to these policy directives.

The timing of this grievance does not violate policy, as there is. no policy of statute limitation of time. Therefore, this grievance meets all of the statutory and policy requirements for filing this grievance.

By the "collective" and/or "individual" acts, omissions, customs and policies, the herein named persons have violated
grievant's constitutional rights under both state and federal consti tutions. EqUOllly so, the herein named persons have applied parole laws, rules, regulations, policies, procedures and practices, erroneously and retroactively to grievant's case,
in direct violation of the "due process" and "ex post facto" clauses. And in support of these claims, grievant states the following:

1) On July 2, 1975, grievant was convicted of a crime and sentenced to a "parolable" life sentence in prison.

2) At the time of grievant's conviction and sentencing. a different parole regime existed than exists today.

3) On July 16, 1975, grievant's sentencing judge sentenced grievant to a parolable life sentence, knowing that at the time, lifers: a) had the right to have Ol personal interview at frequent intervals; b) to be given reasons for a[ny] parole pass-over; c) to have a parole pass-over treated as a denial of parole for purposes of judicial review; and d) to appeal such an adverse decision to the court.

In addition to these, at that time, parolable lifers were reviewed by the parole board under the same, or nearly the same,
standards for parole as other inmates with long indeterminate (i.e., term-of-years) sentences.

4) At the time, many Michigan judges viewed a parolable life 'sentence as more lenient than a long term-of-years sentence,
simply because eligibility began after just ten years instead of later, but WOlS otherwise the same in virtually all respects.

5) Since 1994, Michigan parole laws, policies, and procedures
have changed radically for the worse for this grievant. According to the former parole board chairman, since 1994, "life means life." Grievaut therefore, contends that sinc91994, there has
been almost no distinction betweeen parolable life and mOlndatory life in Michigan.

2

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 23 of 50
Grievant further contends, that this concept of "life means life", is a direct violation of both parole board policy and Michigan statutory law.
6) On December 8, 2003, the Michigan parole board decided to deny grievant a parole release, via a public hearing. The parole board cited an action of "NO INTEREST" I which grievant contends is also a violation of parole board policy. as well as Michigan statutory law. There is no such action as "No Interest" .
7) The above named persons, agencies, and officials have erroneously applied the new parole laws, policies, practices, and procedures retroactively, to this grievant I s detriment, and in direct violation of the due process and ex post facto clauses of the state and federal constitutions.
Grievant therefore, requests that he be reviewed for a parole release under the parole regime and the parole standards that existed when grievant was convicted and sentenced to prison.
(NOTE: See Exhibit "A", attached hereto).
Respectfully Submitted,
~~Lf.~'~
Kenneth A. Foster
3

Michigan DCeapsaert2m:0e5n-tcov-f7C1o3r1re8-cMtioOnBs-VMMParolDeoScuomarednNt 1oticeFoilef dDe0c4i/s0i5o/n2005

Page 24 of 5P0age 1 of 1
CFJ·279

Name:
FOSTER KENNETH

Number: A142187

Location:
RRF

Mailed: 12/11/2003
'-13 - ()h'~

The Michigan Parole Board, having conducted a review of the above prisoner's case,
has determined the following:
IX IThe majority Df the Parole Board has no interest in taking action at this time. Your case
will be reviewed as required by law.

DECISION DATE: 121Cl8/2003
92

ACTION: , No Interest

fJ-J,coff Next In!te.rOvi~ew SchedUled:

.-A--....-----

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 25 of 50

MicbigllD J>c,Jal'tment of Corrections GRIEVANCE APPEAL RECEIPT - STEP II

DATE:

7127104

TO:

FOSTER

142187

LOCATION: IlIlF

4B·6U

FROM:

GrieVi1DCe Coordinator: Rita Crittenden

SUBJECT: Rocoipt "i"the Grievance Appeal Form

I acknowledge receipt of your SU-'jl Il grievance amlcal, idcntificr RRF / 2004 / 07 1 0661 / 27B

which was rccc.ivCd in (his office on

7127/04

Unless you IIrc o(h~rwis~ notified you should be provided II Step II response within 15 business days of the

dale your appelll was received or no later than

8/17/04

If you have not received a response by tllis date or tlle approved extension, you may submit your Step III

Appeal to the Directors office,

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 26 of 50

TO: MDoe Director's Office

Grandview Plaza Building

P.O. Box 30003

Lansing, Michigan

48909

FR; Kenneth A. Foster Bey, 11142187
Ryan Regional Corr. Facility 17600 Ryan Road Detroit, Michigan 48212-1155

RE: Step III Grievance Appeal.

August 19, 2004 A.D.

Dear Di

's Office:

Enclosed, please find the following documents: Grievant's

Step I and II Grievance (with original grievance page attached) I

Additional

#2 3 (two (2) copies) 1 MDOe Parole Board Notice

of Decision (dated 12/08/2003); steps I and IX Gdevance

Responses; and, Prisoner/Parolee Grievance Appeal Form (Steps

II and III), all for filing within this office.

PLEASE NOTE: that on August 16, 2004 A.D., grievant received the Step II Response from Mr. Raymond D. Booker, Warden.

'I'hankillg you

your time in this matter.

Respectfully Submitted,
~-tLf....-Z.~;;;'12187
Kenneth A. ~s~~r ~142187

cc: file/kafb.

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 27 of 50

MtCHlGAN DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS

4835·4248 \2/97

l~rrtt?3 4~~~1cl1,b, PRlSONERJPAROLEE GRIEVANCE APPEAL FORM

aDtaSteteRpeIceIiv:e"d~rJhll.lY.1\"/,

~rSie, .i v.ahmil:e'J,r'ryt~:'Lo!ordinator

c., v.,,L, "

,.

Grievance Identifier

CSI·Z47 B

INSTRUCTIONS;

THIS FORM IS ONLY TO BE USED TO APPEAL A STEP I GRIEY u have not becn provided u appeal it at both Step
I, ~~ o~Jk.dos/
ered terminated,

n. If you should decide to appeal the response you receive at Step you sho send your Step III Appeal to the Directo~s
Office. p.o. Box 30003; Lansing. Michigan. 48909.

Number

Ir'lstilulioo I....(lCk Numoer

, /JfCJ-!f'1 ~ $~6

Date <'If Incident Today+s Date
12/08/03 07/21/04

STEP 1I.:~ason for Appeal Grievant is not satisfied with the response provided
-,-a-t;-'Che step I level. step I response is not correct. Once a.ga.in, this grievant olearly states that he is filing this grievance against ·tile parole board's "FAILURE TO FOLLOW THE PAROLE PROCESS AS OUTLINED IN
PD-06.05.1 i04", as well as other policy directives.

Policy clearly indicates in this regard, a grievance CAN BE written and filed on the parole board. Grievant IS NOT grieving the parole board's decision or recommendation. The language of PDl 06.05.1104(XX)

is ver.y clear. . It is written in plain "English". The parole board o. an

I

STEP n··Response

to the policy. (SEE GRIEVANCE ENCLOSED).

After review of your grievance, I filld the Step I response is upheld and there is

no violation of Policy Directive 03.02.130. Prisoner/Parolee Grievance".

Paragraph F (2), reads in part, "... Grievances that raise the following non-grievable

.

issues also shall be rejected by the Grievance Contdinator: (2) Decisions made by the Parole Boa~d and rec~mme~datlons

made by its hearing officers to grant, deny. rescind. amend or revoke parole, or not to proceed wIth a· hfer mtel'VlCW or a

public hearing." Your grievance is as a result of a fmding by the Parole Board. Grievance Rejected.

<6-5-

Date Returned 10

Respondent's Name (Print)

Respondent's Signature

Dale

C·' STEP IJI.. easonforA~peal AGAIN. and for the third time, Grievant 11 NOT ___",9.C_ic ving" a parole board's decision'. Quite the contrary! Grievant is grieving the parole board's "FAILURE TO FOLLOW THE PAROLE PROCESS AS OUTLINED IN PD-06.05.104". See PD-06.05.104(XX).

Grievant would like for his grievance to be adjudicated
accordingly. The parole' board "failed" 1n its procedural duties.

NOTE: Only a

of this appeal and the response will be returned to you.

STEP III..Director's Response is attached as a separate sheet.

or If you find the Step III Director's response unsalisfactory. you have the option referring the grievance to the Offiee of
Legislative Corrections Ombudsman. 41h Floor. Capitol Hall, 115 W. Allegan, Lansing. Michigan, 48913,

DISTRIBUTiON: Whilc..CenlraIOffice; Green - Canary "Slep lil; Pink"Slep II; Goldenrod..Gl'ievant

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 28 of 50
THIRD STEP GRIEVANCE RESPONSE
Kenneth Foster, #142187 RRF-04-07-0066J-27h
The Grievant presents an issue which alleges on December 8, 2003, the Michigan parole board decided to deny him a parole release, via a public hearing. The parole board cited an actioll of"no interest" which the grievant states is a violation ofthe parole board policy. The issue was found not "&,'ficvable at the local level according to the provisions of Policy Directive/Operating Procedure 03.02.130 (PrisonerlParolee Grievances).
This investigator has reviewed the rewrd presented with the appeal to Step Three. Upon further review ofthe documents presented, the record supports the Step One and Step Two responses to the grievance.
Additional infonnation has not been presented to demonstrate an elTor in this determination. This decision is upheld at this level. Therefore, this grievance appeal is denied.
Approval Signature: ----J~¥'L.I.:.-_i1"""LC."~~-~~":~!f"""="-"""""___ Date: _) (;)<¥/Il¥
#8/ I0-25-0412 7b
cc: Warden Grievant

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 29 of 50

..
'.',

(

" 'Tl/o

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1

tnCHII'JAN DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS
PRISONEJ!/PAROLEE GRIEVANCE FORM 'f,;,

Date Received at Step I _...-L~,,-,-_-:...i_ Grievance Identifier:

Filed 04/(05/2005
,I :\ i /
I I II

Page 30 of 50
4835-4247 10,94 CSJ·247A

What attempt did you make to resolve !his issue prior to writing this grievatl"cei On what
If none, explain why. 1 'Ar')t"" th~! W;5rr'!1!r1l. ':!If i'll'll" c.<:·I.'lc'?l"'l.i. nq Ulijl
hi'~w t"'il~H;~~"::""n,!~\lr2~'II ttT")\a W'ill:rrl~1Jn::§I ot'l(!~ ft~ n.:'~',t. in.'IJ'r::ilv;;~\d

mi!Ht"lr,~",'1 r"".~,·dv"··:1
i'f~. t..h(~ p\':'I,·r0l~ ~.'f:j,'lr:f'I~;"7r..,I'

\

-'.

.

.;

State problem clearly, Use separate grievljiice fonn for each issue. Additional' pages, using plain paper, may be used,r

Four copies of each page and supporting documents must be submitted with this fonn, The grievance must be submitted

Qr to the Grievance Coordinator in a~cordance with the time limits of OP 03,02,130. Tn i. ~,l r t \\1!V II1m'l i i!l I. II t "0 t ~" "

to run a~.ln.t all ••play •• a, Ig_ntu, ind ~Qoncl~~

th. Itat. 0f ~l.

"'Ii<) hill"liol ;,HIlI .infHII!II'IC'~ (.-Ill t~Hl -:QttIP').I,!iii<.i. IHI, l,hl~ p'Hlct!litili, f.!Cil.C';t<."Ht,
;rocedure. or ~n. Mlchlgln ?~rol' Iffiard. illcludlng but nat llmlt~~ t~

tn'i! fal H1Wln) illdl\{I-:i1J.t!l~ ;and wnt.lt.i'~~1

l . OO\l'lIrnor S,;m":.IIIH ~r"nl)ul.

1. Cn~trp.r.Qn John S.
2. CharI • • Dr~ddg~_ ~. Wllll •• Sl~uJnt~r

B~ 'tt&tn~y G~~~!r~l Kt~,! C~y
c. P,)~rlcil~ C.'H""';,,,;::lr;'~t.<ll; :J
MIIIoDII'O.C", fl. Th1l Ml,ahi.';~':l.~n. i),:,I,,, t, ~'1'(' (:·,~'l~~.
5. 'l'h$, M'rC:'l Par~'/,.l..I{~\ ":::'I;~!~';'~~ !'IJ :;,

4. .!>..l "r)':r'i'''' "ICl\!ut;t :::, ~ ~,::,~ i" :t .T "'! r: '::;i! ::.:~ (!t m,"~~ ~ r

i.ndtlli.:!ulIll'r h'; ·C··'(' n ',.

6 .. :",,(,ll~;\:: ,,: ,,;. L.~¥ll.i,,$

7~: >~'~ ;~1"':"1 t,!c,··,rr'l(Y~
,iv:n" ;.' r .~. t t, ~l!~ b.U·y

•

" • . .1 ,~"-,m,, 1'. n,.d. n 1'1'1

10. ~0rb~ra ~~ S.~p.on

!:-.,.t,) C•·t~",·t·,·.

..' '."","
Grievant'!) Signature

0 RESPONSE (Grievant Interviewed? Yes [] No If No, give explanation. If resolved, explain resolution,)
... ':;.rLw.,((lCt3 c'J!.h~ h,,,,:'1 i),!(,111 c!lang!!ld •t \."C':"'" 16(~ to 2iJo1.

Gri~~anc. i8 raj ectad at 9tap I. It is ~ duplication of ~;vacgl

qrlQvanc~3 you have filed to the Parole Suard on this lama iSBU ••

Do no~ continue to fila additional grimvance. on this !ldU0 Which ;(aa b• • n aJdr.ss8~, Q'.~t.,..'it. ,. m·,~'~i~·'"~".~,pult .ill t yuM...,'l...·. (.'. j - " ( ,1;1:",,':.1\ l(:~n.,

on MOU1fiaJ Acee•• status.

f)/d{);j

Respondent's Signature Respondent's Name (Priot)

./ ~'... ': :.','" ''/ Date

/
~, -:l1J..oi~.L;-==Ffp,bL!,.~~-­

.',..,,'

,

, eviewer's Sign4u

Date

f" \'.:~
Re

;i

e

;1e'<1~::l..;.),~','~J 'hi:(1P: rint)

.") ·::1 .;i u t 'i Working Tille

Date RelUIJled to

If resolved at Step I, Grievant sign here,

Grievant "".".

.

I

'" 1

Resolution must be described above.

Grievant's Signature

Date

DISTRlBT.mON: WhIt.. Green, Canary, Pink--Proces. 10 Step One; Goldonrod··Orievant

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04(/05/2005 Page 31 of 50

Con'ted. pg.2.

I,Johnny Alexander, #163875, cOlllplain that the above-named parties/agencies, by their collective or individual acts and omissions, or by their customs and policies, have violated my constitutional rights under the state and federal constitutions. Specifically, they have applied parole laws, rules, regulations, policies, procedures, and practices retroactively in violation of the due process and ex post facto clauses.

In support of my grievance, t state the following:

1..

In 1981, I was convicted of a crime and sentenced to

parolable life in prison with the expressed intent for the

possibility of parole (Parolable Life).

2.

At the time of my conviction and sentencing, a different

parole regime existed than exists today.

3.

At that t 1me parole 11 fers had the right to have a

personal l?arole interview at frequent intervals, to be given

reasons for a parole pass-over, to have a parole pa ss-over

treated as a denial of parole for purposes of judicial review,

and to appeal such an adverse decision to court. In addition, at

that time paI"olable lifers were reviewed by the board under the

same, or near the same t standards for parole as any other inmates

with long indeterlllinate (term-of-years) sentences.

4.

At the time, many Michigan judges viewed a parolable life

sentence as more lenient than a long term-of-years sentence,

because parole eligibility began after just ten years instead of

later, but was otherwise the same in virtually all aspects.

5.

Since 1994, Michigan's parole laws, policies t practices,

and procedures haVe changed radically for the worse for me.

According to the former parole board chair, since 199cl "Life

means Li fe" . I believe that since 1994 there has been a Imost no

distinction between parolable life and mandatory life in

Michigan, in violation of legislative intent. ~nd sentencing

judge intent, (See attached Document 'Articles').

6.

The above-named people/agencies have applied the new

parole laws, pol icies, practices, and procedures retroactively,

to me detriment, and in violation of the due process and ex post

facto clauses of the state and federal constitutions. 1

therefore request that I be reviewed for parole/public hearing

under the parole regime and the parole standards that exist when

I was convicted and sentenced, and that the intent of my

sentencing judge be met.

Date:~

'. (
MICHIGCAaNseDE2P:0A5R-TcMv-E7N1T3O1F8-CMOOR'"RBE-CVTMIOMNS Document 1

Filed 04/(05/2005 Page 32 of 50 4835· 424R 12197

PRISONERIPAROLEE GRIEVANCE APPEAL FORM

CSJ-247 II
'SfVlF at!, 0/, 079<1· 2.5a

Date Received by Grievance Coordinator

at Step II:

(i'm·D'{ _

Grievance ldenlifier 1 1 / 1 / 1 / I I I I I L l l i

INSTRUCTIONS: THIS FORM IS ONLY TO BE USED TO The wltite copy oftlte PrisonerlParolce Grievance Fonn CSJ-247A witlt a Step I response in a timely manner) MUST be attached to tlte II and Step III.

If you
__

should decide to appeal the
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ by

Step
S

I
·

g2r.i0eva-n0ce1re.spIofnitseis

to Step II, not sub~

~~~'!~\~~~~~ uC~'vc not been provided

fJliMBIF ite~af 2f

t~ ou appeal it at both Step

Sn, tHl"ll'i\'llr>Ml;ilM.~j'IeIl'A'lPtIIY'.t'1IiIIl'Ilt~f8I&I!fu

to~ [). t.k

m
_.<

·bytlilSdate, It WIH be considered temlinated.

If you should decide to appeal the response you receive at Step II, you should send YOUf Step ill Appeal to the Dire~lor's
Office, p.o. Box 30003, Lansing, Michigan, 48909.

Name (nrs~ lasl)

Number

InstilUtion Lock N"mbcr

Date of IncideOl Tud.y'; llat: ~]

Alexand

4-

d.2-.

STEP H--Reason for Appeatl St.ep one response does not 3ddress t,he i saues. And

tha rea.ons given are whOllY false, for I have Dot filed any grievances

against. the said issues

parole stated

li:n>oasrtd.~on

o

n,is ne. ,

!\',atter.

TlJerefor8, I seek a r.;'1,ly t,o

STEP II--Response
The response at step I addresses your issue. The Parole Board states your issue has been addressed in previous grievances. Appeal denied.

Date Received hy Step II Respondent:
G -/8·01

espond nt's Signature

S;)l'rJt Dnte Returned to Grievant:

Date

6-zJl

STEP III--Reason for Appeal

I assert the same position as in step I & II. The issues nave not
been addressed, nor have t.hey heen grieved before.

NOTE: Only a copy of this

and the respome will be returned to you.

STEP III·-Director's Response is attached as a sepru;ate

If you find the Step III Director's response unsatisfacto'ry, you have the option of referring the grievance to the Offke of Legislative Correctiom Ombudsman, 4th FloOf, Capitol Hall, 115 W. Allegan, Lansing, Michigan, 48913.

DISTRIBUTION: White--CcntrnIOffice; Green· Canary ··Step III; Pink--Slep II; Goldenrou--Grievant

( Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/0\ 5/2005 Page 33 of 50
\~ THIRD STEP GRIEVANeE RESPONSE

John Alexander, #163875 SMF, 04-04-00794, 16C

'}./f

The Grievant presents an issue which alleges that the grievance is against all State of Michigan employees, agents, and agencies. The gIievancc was not rejected at the local level according to the provisions of Policy Directive 03.02.130, titled "Prisoner/Parolee Grievances" and Operating Procedure, 03.02.130 tilled "Prisoner/Pamlee Grievances"

This investigator has reviewed the record presented with the appeal to step three. It is noted that the grievance issue does not present a grievable issue in a rational and responsible manner. Relief is not warranted or recommended. Upon further review of the documents presented, tIle record supports that additional information has not been presented on appeal to demonstrate an error in this determination. This decision is upheld at this level. This grievance appeal is denied.

Approval Signature:
#4/6-24-04116C
C: Warden Grievant

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 34 of 50

..

( " fl'" iOr't

I.:

Case '

2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM "",

,.""T'D/:~o:(~cu,'~:'"m,e,' nt

1

MICIUGAN DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 'jt~i\;('

PRISONER/PAROLEE GRIEVANCE FdK'M ;;'~

Filed 04/05/2005

Page 35 of 50
48354247 10,94 CS]·241A

"
,I

I"I

-j

)"

What attempt did you make to resolve this issue prior to writing this grievance? On what date1_:.J..::-="-'-_-"--_-'-'-(',~' If none, explain why.

State problem clearly, Usc separate glievancl': form for each issue. Additional pages, using plain paper, may be"used. •;', Follt cOpies of each page andsup~rting documents must be submitted with this form. the grievance must be submitted
to the Grievance Coordinator in accordance with the time limits of OP 03.02.130.

." .. " .....,..,. " ,

'_M ••• • ••• __ "., ••~ •• ,."".",.,~ • • w "'.~ _

~,

.'~l

ariev~t's Signature

'Pl' RESPONSE (Grievant Interview~a? DYe,s No If No, give explanation. If resolved, explain resolution,)

!:~ ..... 1nl!~.,,~:',:~n,t:~:,~

b:i'.:'~',',::l r~:)fn~~:t:.i::(t {'I":;}' nl.''Ir~''~:jf';J:,~I;:)bi~·· i~,~'(:~if"t) j)Gf PD,·(ll 0",'> 1]0 [)~}CL~,',j{\n',~\ ln~:::ji~h:,: -1:,,)'

r.·!t(h~';i,i d i1!t(l<J ~ f~',~)nli·'t~~':·d Id~~hGn~'~ n\dd~) by in:1 I"k~:1.dnq~~I' (~'rhC{i,!r :':f k; \>.~i"i.'U"~t d~::n:y' i ~.!'I~~{~~nd I

f'\:',U'ok. '. \{ n()t; 1.() ~\r()G<'1\:1('i' vvith ;.'~ t i;~'f:;,r !~'~~t~~~·'\.fI;'I':.~v,/ ~"j~ F~t \~";\h(: H~~!i,H'in~J ::';t'(.~ rV·.!f."~·"Ur-p?\,g.:hl';,,:

.. ,,",II
Respondent's Signature
Respondent's Name (Print)

,",""'~'I:' 'I"""'I~,! ·'-·'.,-,r."1',,\,,~"
Working Title

Reviewer's Signaturo

: :

~

I"", Ii·",', ~d..,....

.j,,><

Reviewer's Name (print)

Date Returned to

t_1, Grievlll1t, -

.

, If resolved il1 Step I, Grievant sign here. jl.esolulion must be described above. Grievant's Si~nature

.. , D1STRHl1)TJON: ,- White, ar ""CanIlrY, Pi.hk.-Proce,~ to Step One; Gold.nrod.:arl""anl"~'·'

;

'" .. , ",

,,"" ,~,'"

,,~j"

r'~

~.,

'.\.

:',':i

Date Working Title
Date
~:
;' ....

c Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04(/'05/2005 Page 36 of 50

Grievance

This grievance is intended to run against all employees, agents, and agencies of
the State of Michigan who have any influence on the composition, laws, policies, practices, and procedures of the Michigan Parole Board, including but not limited to the following individuals and entities:

A. Governor Jennifer M. Granholm B. Attorney General Mike Cox
C. Patricia Caruso, Director ofthe Michigan Department of Corrections D. The Michigan Department of Corrections E. The Michigan Parole Board, and individually its members:

I. Chaitperson Jolm S. Rubitschun 2. Charles Braddock 3. William Slaughter 4. Marjorie McNutt 5. Marianne Samper 6. George Lellis 7. Miguel Berrios
8. Janles E. Atterbury
9. James J. Quinlan 10. Barbara S. Sampson

tiM I,WAr6~

&,',9.. , # 13 'H 1.'2 ,complain that the above-named

partieslagen les, by their coUectlVe or mdlVldual acts and omissions, or by their customs

and policies, have violated my constitutional rights under the state and federal constitu-

tions. Specifically, they have applied parole laws, rules, regulations, policies, procedures,

and practices retroactively in violation of the due process and ex post facto clauses.

In support of my grievance, I state the following:

I. In 19.!Ji. I was convicted of a crime and sentenced to life in prison with
the possibility ofparole (parolable life).

2. At the time of my conviction and sentencing, a different parole regime existed than exists today.

3. At that time parolable lifers had the right to have a personal parole interview at frequent intervals, to be given reasons for a parole pass-over, to have a parole pass-over treated as a denial of parole for purposes ofjudici al review, and to appeal such
an adverse decision to court. 111 addition, at that time parolable lifers were reviewed by
the board under the same, or nearly the Same, standards for parole as other inmates with long indeterminate (tenn-of-years) sentences.

(
Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 37 of 50
Grievance Page Two
4. At the time, many Michigan jndges viewed a parolable life sentence as more lenient than a long term-of-years sentence, because parole eligibility began after just ten years instead of later, but was otherwise the same in virtually all respects.
5. Since 1994, Michigan's parole laws, policies, practices, and procedures have changed radically for the worse for mc. According to the former parole board chair, since 1994 "life means life." I believe that since 1994 there has been almost 110 distinction between parolable life and mandatory life in Michigan.
6. The above"natned people/agencies have applied the new parole laws, policies, practices, and procedures retroactively, to my detriment, and in violation of the due process and expostfacto clauses of the state and federal constitutions.
I therefore request that I be reviewed for parole under the parole regime and the parole standards that existed when I was convicted and sentenced.
Sincerely,
Date: 5"'. /6" eNI ,2004

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 38 of 50

MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS GRIEVANCE APPEAL RECEIPT - STEP"
TO: 137927 KINCAID
oav. ~
FROM; MHP Grievance Coordinator C!IS7;, Tallio

4835-0978 CAJ-978 11/94
DATE: 6/14/04
8-;::2
LOCATION; MBP ~

SUBJECT: Receipt of the Gdevllnce Appelll Form

I acknowledge receipt ofyolU' Step 11 grievance appeal, Identifier MBP 04 05 1121 270D which was received in this ofOce 011 6/10/04 .
{,..,,.,..'(.#p
Unless you are otherwise notified, you should be provided II Step 11 rCSpOltSe within 15 business days orthe dute your appeal was received or 110 later than 7/1/04 • If you have not received a response
by tilis date or agreed to an extension, you may submit your Step III appeal (0 1116 Director's office.

.tr ,'..

I

zb~ MICHIGACNasDeE2PA:0R5T-McvE-N7T1o31r8C-OMR(OR, EB:C-TVIMONMS

Document 1
• ..

JUFNile2d I0i4/05/20.. 01 "5

PRISONERlPAROLEE GRIEVANCE APPEAL FORM

Page 39 of458305-424R 12/97
C51-247 B

~ .i

Date Received byjdrievancc Coordinator
at Step It _i..R.::J.Q - 0 ~I

I Grievance Icl':ritifiN I I r4Pp410511~21127pI1 I I I I I

INSTRUCTIONS: nns FORM IS ONLY TO BE USED TO APPEAL A STEP I GRIEVANCE.
The white copy d the PrisonerlParolee Grievance Form CSJ·247A (or the goldenrod copy if you have not been provided with a Step 1 response in a timely manner) MUST be attached to the white copy of this form if you tlppeal it at both Step
II and Step IIL

If you should decide to appeal the Step I grievance response to Step II, your appeal should be directed to:

Step U

MBP

,by

6111/04. If it is not submitted by this date, it will be considered terminated.

If you shQuld decide to appeal the response you receive at Step II, you should send your Step III Appeal to the Director's
Office, p.o. Box 30003, Lansing, Michigan, 48909.

Name (fi"I.I.,!)

Number

Inslitution

Lock Number

Datc or Inl:ident Today',Oato
/'-'1- 0,/

STEP II--Reason ror Appeal

- - - - - - _ _............ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - , - - - - - - . . ,

STEP n··Response It is noted your Step I grievance was rejected as a non grievable issue regarding decisions made by the Parole Board. After reviewing your Step I grievance and subsequent appeal, that rejection

Dale Received by Step II Respond~n7
G,-{O -6 I

is supported.

Jerry Hofbauer, Warden
Rc,pondent's Name (Print) STEP III--Reason for Appeal

Date Returned to

NOTE: Only a copy of this appeal and the respon~e will be returned to you. STEP lU--Director's Response is attached as a separate ~heet.
= = = = = = = = ' " = '= = :::"':'===';:=.:::~.::r::=='=.
If you find the Step III Director's response unsatisfactory, you have the oplion of referring the grievance to the Office of Legislative Corrections Ombudsman, 4th Floor, Capitol Hall, 115 W. Allegan, Lansing, Michigan, 48913
DISTRIBUTION: Whitc--CcntraIOffice: Green - Canary --Step III; Pink..Slop It; Gotdcnrod--Grkvant

.f'.'.
I

(

Case 2:05-cv-71318-M"OB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 40 of 50

THIRD STEP GRrEYANCE RESPONSE)

(I (I

Waymon Kincaid, 1/137927

d)

MBP-04-05-1121-27d

r:,

The Grievant presents an issue which is related to a Parole Board decision. The issue was found not grievable at the local level according to the provisions of Policy Directive/Operating Procedure 03.02.130 (Prisoner/Parolee Grievances).
This investigator has reviewed the record presented with the appeal to Step Three. Upon further review of the documents presented, the record supports the Step One and Step Two responses to the grievance. Additional infomlation has not been presented to demonstrate an error in this
determination. This decision is upheld at this leveL Thcrelhre, this grievance appeal is denied,

~""IY"'=::...:'-'-'-":'~-'-'~'-"-"-=""'J<." ?L,-)'3-'i/u,1"-/-~/ Approval Signature:
V #617-9-04/27d

*._.1.:...-.".._.;.3..'_...- ._ _ Date: _

_ __

cc: Warden Grievant

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 41 of 50

(
~;CHldANCase 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1
DEPARTMENT or CORRECTIONS :..

(
Filed 04/05/2005

, i:;
Page 42 of 50
,'-~<; 8'.35·~Z47 IO/9~

PRISONERIPAROLEE CRIEVANCE FORM

CSJ·247A

'~', '~~ il~hl (I 'i 'fi .

7 a~)l)4

fjl~ ·1:j'.'I ..l ..1\ '~I ,I.\/'\ i. '1. ,J ,. "1 Ii

I Date Reqeived at Step I _ _.. ___•_ _ Grievancdctentitier:

I III

'

I

)

'i·:!,

Be bri~f and concise in describing your grievance issuer If you have anyquestion8 concerning the grie~'ance

·procedure. refer to PD 03,02.130 and OP 0:Hl2.130..availahle in the pri~on Law Library.

.

.

(

;.' ,

','

'

,

"

"":,,

,:,.

",

,",','"

".

Name (print first. last)

NUl11hcr

InHtitlJliml Lock Number Dale of Incident Today" Date

",1] 11'J1,,1'(\[,\ ':::rJI'ni~p'F'~~

11t.:;S19

,I:~'!)F~

,'\:()(~/!"'jt:.',~·~

1/1:f/!)J.l 7/'1 ~/('41

Wh:'t atte;npt did you make to resolve this issue prior to writing thi~ grievance? On what dme? " /., '", 1.'lA-- .. _ _

If nonc. c'xplain why.

. .

On '.lund 2'~, .'not, r wrclba thr.:) ~h'ili"m::Hl..clff t~.\'1J2~ \U(:!ht~.'l1n

... P·lI.cple ...)k.)ia',",d... '~);l(1,;tte"'Lw.,d;3d'.' r·".:..co:n,.dd~!r).. t.i.mr:(lf ··ffii t;<l (·;ih!.,

(Ra. attsch.d !xhihlt 11 On tbta rtatG, t c.a~iv.(1 a

l(;d:t;,:,;,,' fi:"D!;'il th~ r),;u:ol~~ r~('Jd":cd f:lta tinq t.h.~~y 'ro'<Hll .j C:('Jn$i.d,,:::~c,-

State prohlem deady_ Usc separate grievance form [Of each issue. Additional pages. using plain paper, mlly he used.

Four copks of each pllge and supporting documents mllst be submitted with this form. The grievance must be suhmitted

to the Grievance Coordinator in accordance with the lillle limits of OP 03.02. 1.10.

- ;,',1i

1,:t,,;;:u: in

,,:Of)n chn::-:ln"j 1l~1 n,}:x'f: J;:·!:!~li\~'~'l. '" II '"

'r l?'~l~ l:~ f\ '1,'.:: ':.~ r:i';~ ,1\.'r1~ i\CH1.:;f1 (:;'(~ Tr~v ,\:11(' ~~ r ~lP()I.~ t'li J\ I (ll'T
'rH.t\~r r~XPL,\Ihl';~ ri\T iH~'l':'\, tTl '"vHr) J\r'Jll ~!:~'~P\.'I' T :I\~1 t~YJTr.;\rr.q~.,

RESPONSE (Gricv

0 DYes

No

~1"'! ,tLo/,~.-

, ",

, ,

. '" Gnt,'v.ll.lt'S Slgn.l.Iul'e .,'•,

.:'

Ie No. give explanlltioJl. Ifresolved. explain resolution.)

DISTRIBUTION: Whit~, Gn':~!Il, CLlnmy, Pink -~ Prl1~:I.!!O;s to S\f,.~p One::; Gokll..'nrn(\ Gril.:vallt

(
Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1

Filed 04(/05/2005 Page 43 of 50

GRIBVARCE. STEP ONE:

Page 1 of 2

This 91'ie'famce is. intended to run a9ainst iIlll employees, agents, aad aqeneies of the state of Mtcl!ti<Ja.ft wl\e have an,. influence ontl,. cea,.siU•• , laws, policies, practices, ilnd pl'ecedure. of the Michi9an Parole Board, including but not limited
to thefoll••ing :J.udividuals and entities:

A. c._rita%" "tiUllntfer II. Granholm B. Attorney aeneral Mike Cox
C. Patricia Caruso, Director, Michigan Dept. ar Corrections.
D. The lIiohi<JaD Department of CorrecUonS. E. 1'he Micht,•• Parole Board, lind illdividuaUy its 11l4l!mbers:

1. Chairperson John S. Rubitschun
2. Charles Bra~dock 3. Willia. Slaughter 4. Marjorie McNutt 5. Marianne Samper 6. George Lellis 7. Miguel Berrios 8. James E. Atterbury 9. Ja.as J. Quinlan 10. Barbara S. Sampson

- :r1~J&.\@M, ~~

,

.
"IIIkS!ill,

complain that the above-name.

parties agencies, by theiroollective "'1' individual acts and

Qmissi$ns,.r by their cu~toms and pelioles, have vielated my

con.tit_tienal rights under the state aad federal constitutions.

Specifically, they have applied parole laws, .l'ule8, regulations,

policies, procedures, aRd practices retroactively in violation

of the due process and ex post facto ola1l.s.s.

In support of my grievance, I state the following:

1. tn 19H r was convicted of a crtlM iIInd sentenced to
life in prison with the possibility of parole, (parolable life).

2. At the time "'f my conviction and sentencing, a different parole regime existed than exists today.

l. At that time par.lable lifers had the right to have a personal parole interview at frequent intervals, to be 'liven reasons for a parole pa8S-9ver, to bave a parele paBs-over treat•• as Ii denial of parole fer purposes ef judicial re"lew, and to appeal such an adverse decision to c&urt. In additlen, at tbat time parolable lifers vere reviewed ~y the Hard under .the .... , or nearly the same, standards for parole as other inmates with 10n9" indeterminate (term-of-years) !lent.nces.

( Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1

Filed 04(/05/2005 Page 44 of 50

4. At the time, many Michigan judges ~iewed ill parolable

life senteRCe illS _re lenient than ill lORg terlll-.f-yaars santance,

Page two: step ORe. Grievance:

.

because parole eligibility lMI'lan after just ten years inste.1!! of later, but was otherwise the same in virtually all respectS.

5. Since 1994, MichigaDfs parole laws, policies, practiCles,
anel procedures tlaye cllillnqocll radically for the worse for lIle. AccQrdinCjJ to thj;l former parole board chair, since 1994 Nlite means life.- llIeUIlVEI that silllce ",. there has been abtost no distinction between parolable life and mandatory life in
Michigan •.

6. The above-named people/agencies have applied the nev parole laws, pelicies,practices, and proced~rea retroactively, to my detrillent, aDd in, violation of the due process aad ex post
facto clauses ef the state and fader.l constitutions.

I therefore request that I b<:l revie_d for. parole under the parole regime and the parole standard. that existed when
I was convioted and.eDtenoed.

Sincerely,

(
lIGANCDasEePA2R:0TM5-EcHvT-7O1F3C1O8R-MREOCBT-IOVNMSM Document 1 lSONJ<:RJPAROLEE GRIEVANCI<: APPEAL FORM

(
Filed 04/05/2005 Page 45 4o8f355·40248 17197
CSJ-247 B

t. late Rec~!~e4 ~Y Griev. nee Coordinator
" -.!+2.I- at Step 11: 1\~....;\ I L _ __

INSTRUCTIONS: TIllS FORM IS ONLY TO BE USED TO APPEAL A STEP I. GRIEVANCE,
The white copy of the Prisoner/Parolee Grievance Form CSJ·247A (or the goldenrod copy jf you have not b()e·n provided with a Step Tresponoe in ~ tilllely manner) MOST he attached to the white copy of this form if you ",pp(,ol it at both Stt'l'

II and Step III.

If you should decide to appeal the Step 1 grievanc(~ rcsprmse to Step II, your appeal should be directed lu: '~''''_"•. '.__.

___ ,,,,,,,_""

""_,,__ by

'),. ~~. a. ~"."i'~ f~ja :~. j'~1 ,~lf' ~,:,~'

,_,~_ _' If it is nut submitted by this date, it will Ix considered tenninated.
~,";' J ,0 0,,:1,

If you should decide to appeal the respons~ yuu receive at Step lI, you should send your Step III Appeal to the Director's

Office, p.o. Box 10001; L~nsiQg, Mkhig#I\, 489(19.

. "

i

I!
.

_..

_.T~~;';';~b!·f:' ~'"'~', ~
,.,.".,.

•.'

-\< .,.'_ .•',." ""

'Iln~tt~;li;·;~'-~~~'"l··L."~·kNu mb~;,"":, :'-.]·D;;;:;";;rr.~;d;;,;tj1;Od,,;';"""i);;I~-_.]

_ _ .1_

~ (!

_

ij'4~ ~J' _"___ !..;'"

.~~_J.tS3~.. ..,~Lu~J":::_lLL~.L.tc:~,"~3~L

STEP Il--Reasoll for Appeal

""~ t:,I~:~';? dn,:·"~ ::'<i;- :i~ ,,"/(') n s (;: \"',Nl .~~ t h.:i t r ~.:tr.[! (] ~ t ~~, vi t"'!,,:} t h ,) i",'~:i to,) 1.<~ !·'h.}-~.1 c,J ~~iI
'~)...H;;L::JI:lQIl i.n Jlj C.:'L~~~~. J..t n() ~:'i.,HH,':~ 1\"l1h~ t ~::'~iJ ~)"C i.ddi~.!{d:d 1 tr),lt I .;;4;,ll 1~~l~L~vtn'd t~h'~1 i..la,,£;'Q.l;;.;) T'h.)"J..c{L~ t!:iJ~r:l("':!j J1i in. .tty Cl.<\.~~f r d ~~ :l.C)i~'''\'''C, :';.':'i.,ijvtn'J 1:;.1'~ ,/,H'uL, h(M;:,.I, ,;;,!v:1 ,d,t ()..it'tu~:;! i!lVOl.V'I(l
~:f.it.:.h t.1h'~ nr~U;"l':~::':':\l'~t ;:)i:;I()(":,~r~rdJn:"',1 "ii\ W;·I.f.I;;;"i'"], t::h.'~~l ,J,~.c{v').I'f ~'lt. r;I,·E.t't
:·\(~(:;i,.~;o~J" ,;J.1"'vt ·r.. ~","~·"',jj'"F~'''~:i'~'7"1'li~..,7'.·.'..·~·~:".,,,~~':,.-;'''·''1,','_') ,'.:.".1r,.,) t.,"') ;~)'1".".,:'';'~'."~,) ''f""'i"l'tv''0. (" .. ) ..

STEI' n--R~,ponse

Date Rct..:eived hy

-'-11 Step

If

. .I.'eS. "I \

l'o.n\ di.,'.'~. n.\I:

Date Returned to
Gl'ieVJ.llt:

----.~---"
.-.".;..,-.."'...~' ::-:.:':'.'
If you find Ih" Step !l1 [)irector's response ullsarisfaetory, you have the option nf referring th~ gricv:lnce to the Office of Lcgj,<lative Correclion, Ombudsman, 4th Floor. Capitol Hall, 115 W, Allegan, Lansillg, Michig'lIl, 48013.
.." ' DlS"fRIl3UTION: Whilc..Ccnlrat Office: Green - Canary ••Slep!ll; Pillk--Step II; Ooldcnrod,,·Gl'ievallt

(

(

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 46 of 50

Response - Step II Grievance Appeal SRF-Q4-07-00778-27d Sleeper #116539
Grievant claims that his constitutional rights have been violated by the State of Michigan and its
Officers when they have applied parole laws, rules, regulations, pOlicies, procedures and practices retroactively. Grievant is requesting that he be reviewed for parole under a parole regime and parole standards that existed when he was convicted and sentenced.
The Grievance Coordinator rejected the grievance for containing issues that are non-grievable, per PD 03.02.130. Decisions of the Parole Board and recommendations made by its hearings
officers to grant, rescind, amend or revoke are specifically listed in policy as non~grievable.
Grievant claims on appeal to Step II that he is not grieving the decision, but is grieving the current procedure which was used to arrive at the decision.
The record has been reviewed on appeal.
The Grievance Coordinator acted appropriately in rejecting the grievance. Grievant cannot grieve a Parole Board decision and the grievance procedure has no jurisdiction over how the Parole Board arrives at decisions. Procedures cannot be grieved, per policy, and the changes made within the Parole Board have taken place under legislative enactments, which are also nongrievuble as the facility has no control over legislative decrees. No further action is required at this step.
The grievance is denied at this step.

e LaUer, War en.--
Saginaw Correctional Fa July 30, 2004
Cc: Grievance Coordinator - SRF
file

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/(05/2005 Page 47 of 50

THIRD STEP GlUEVANCE RESPONSE
WILLIAM SLEEPER, #116539 SRF,04-07-00778-27d
The Grievant presents an issue which alleges that his constitutional rights have been retroactively violated. He is seeking a review for parole under a parole regime and parole standards that existed when he was convicted and sentenced. TlLis issue was non-grienble at the local level in accordance with the provisions of Policy Directive PD03.02.130, titled "PrisonertParo1ee Grievances". There was no documentation to support the Grievant's allegations ofstaff misconduct. Therefore, the step one and two response is upheld and relief is !lot warranted at this Icvel.
This investigator has reviewed the record presented with the appeal to step three. The record supports that staff properly responded to this grievance at step two and it is not clear why the step one response was not attched.. Additional infol1nation has not been presented to demonstrate an error in this detennination. This decision is upheld at this level. This grievance appeal is denied.

~ ~ Appnw,iSign""'"

Date:

#J/12-20-04-1

cc; \'{1arden Grievant

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 48 of 50

(
Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 49 of 50

What attempt did you make to resolve this issue prior to writing this grievance? On what date? ____._ _ _ __
If none, explain why.
No resolution can be obtained at this level of the process. The issues involved are constitutional in nature, and prior to pursuing these claims in court, the issues must be presented in this grievance anda(jministratively exhausted.
State problem clearly. Use separate grievance foml for each issue. Additional pages. using plain papcr, may he used.
Four copies of each page and supporting documents must be submitted with this form. The grievance must be submitted to the Grievance Coordinator in accordance with the timC'Jimits of OP 03.02.130,
This grievance is against all employees, agents, and agencies of the State of Michigan who have any influence on the composttion, laws, policies, practices, and procedures of the Michigan Parole Board, including but not limited to the following individuals and entities: Governor Jennifer Granholm; Attorney General Mike Cox; Director Patricia Caruso of the Michigan Department of Corrections, the Michigan Department of Corrections; Michigan Parole Board and individually tts members (Chairperson John S. Rubitschun, Charles Braddock, William Slaughter, Ma~orie McNutt, Marianne Samper, George Lellis, Miguel Berrios, James Atterbury, James J. Quinlan, and Barbara S, Sampson). I, Robert Weisenauer grieve/complain that the above named parties, by their collective or individual acts and omissions, or by their customs and policies, have violated my constitutional rights under the state and federal constitutions. Specifically, they have applied parole laws, rules, regulations, policies, procedures, and practices retroactively in violation of the due process and ex post facto clauses,
In support of this grievance, I state the following: 1. In 1979 I was convicted of a crime and sentenced to life in prison with the possibility of parole, 2. At the time of my conviction and sentencing a different parole regime existed than exists today.
(Continued on page two)

Grievant's Signalure

DYes D RESPONSE (Grievant Interviewed?

No If No, give explanation. If resolved, explain resolution,)

REJECTED
SEE ATTACHED STATEMENT

Respondent's Sib'llature

_ - - - - - ' -:--:---_..

Dale

Reviewer's Signature

Date

Respondent's Name (Print)

Working Title

Reviewer'. Name (Print)

Working Tilte

Dn,e Retu,ned to ",;' If resolved at Step r, Grievant ~ign here.

Orievant:,:/ .. 1/ '/'''/ Resolution must be described above. Grievant's Signature

Date

I....-_ _ _ _ _-L-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _"_ ..._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _._'''_......~,

DISTRIBUTION: White, Or...n, Canary, Pink,·Proce" to Step One; Goldenrod--Gne,.nt

(
Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 50 of 50
Weisenauer Grievance· Page Two

Robert Weisenauar

157085

TeF CA-39

04/03/04 04/03/04

(Continued from page one)
3. AI thai time parolable lifers had the right to have a personal parole Interview at frequent intervals; to be given reasons for a parole pass-over; to have a parole pass-over treated as a denial of parole for
purposes of judicial review; and to appeal such an adverse decision to court. In addition, at that time parolable lifers were reviewed by the board under the same, or nearly the same, standards for parole as
other inmates with long indeterminate (term-at-years) sentences. 4. At the time, many Michigan judge's viewed a parolable lite sentence as more lenient than a log term-
of-years sentence, because parole eligibility began after just ten years instead of later, but was otherwise the same in virtually aI other respects.
5. Since 1994, Michigan's parole laws, policies, practices, and procedures have changed radically for the worse for me. According to the former parole board chair, since 1994, "/lfe means life." I believe that since 1994 there has been almost no distinction between parolable life and mandatory life in Michigan.
6. The above named people/agencies have applied the new parole laws, policies, practices, and procedures retroactively, to my detriment, and in violation of the due process and ex post facto clauses of the state and federal constiMions.
I therefore request that I be reviewed for parole under the parole regime and the parole standards that existed when I was convicted and sentenced.

#1'1~;t:hf4lIM 157()!lS'

,-

ROBERT WEISENAUER #157085

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 1 of 23

MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS

Date: To: F'rom:
Subject;

"Expecting Excellence Every Day"

MEMORANDUM

April 16, 2004

.il~,'- #157085 Weisenauer (Lock: CA-39)
Dennis Sergent, Gricvllnee CoordinatorfJ

Thumb CorrectionII) Faeility (TCF)

, ~-

"

Rejected Step I Grievance #'.fCF-04-04-00370-027D

The above referenced Step I grievance is returned to you, rejected in accordance PD 03,02.130 & OP 03.02.130. Decisions made by the Parole Board and recommendations made by its hearing oriicers to grant, deny, rescind, amend or revoke parole, prnot to proceed with a lifer interview or a public heari~~'laj no(~-grieVable.

Reviewed B(

J\,' 1,,--

'-Kalh rine Co I 'an, ADW/Housing

Dale: April 16, 2004

cc: Parole Board Pile

, , i

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 0C4/05/2005 Page 2 of 23

Step II Grievance Appeal Response

Tel? tJ40400370027 D

Nllnw: Weisenaucr

Numbe..: 157085

Locl<: CA 39

Your Step I grievance, the respunse, al)d your rea~on for appeal have heen reviewed.

Summary of Step I Complaint:

Grievance wa~ rejected at Step J in accordance with PO 03.02.130 as decisions made by the Parole Board arc non
gricvablc.

Summary of Step I Response:
N0 re~ponsc prepared.

Summary of Reason for Appeal: Prisc'ller ~1'lte,; tbere W'IS no resolution at Step 1.

Summary of Step II Investigation:
Grievance was rejected ,It Step I. PO 03.020130, pg S RR lists the following reasons issues are HUll grievanbc: #3. Oeci~hms made by the Parole Board ... ".

Conclusion:

The Step I grievance was appropriately rejected as it does nOllneel the criteria OLltlined for processing
grievances.

Based on the above, your grievance is considered

denied

at Step II.

Respondent's Name (Print) Millicent Warren, Warden

MICl.'IICGAaNseDi2~j:0I5'-Ac~Rv;-r7{~1T3' P1F8-CMORORBE-CVTMI9MNS Document 1-2

PRISONERifAR' .:":.:.-~:.";f.R' IJ, i':"V.ANq.E APPEAL FORM

Date Received at Step II:

by

GrieAvPaRnce'tC7oo7r0d0i4nator:

G '

Id 'f'

nevance enll ler

Filed 04/05/2005

Page 3 o4f83253·4248 12197
C5),247 B

'. INSTRUCTIONS: THIS FORM IS ONLY TO BE USED ~~~L A STEP I GRIEVANCE.

The white copy of the PrisonerlParolee Grievance Form CSJ -Rr~~'-

y if you have 1I0t been provided

with a Step I response in a timely manner) MUST be attache tne whit6-~~t:'b @i rm if you appeal it at both Step

II and Step III.

MA r 1 J ?UU4

~O\l ~Id ap~al a8r.;~l:!)oul ~ t? decidy:\6

the Step IJriCv?Ce response to 1(,lA,V-

directed to:

\t.JIA C£ o(j~(c.e by 6-t:. 7Jt::::., . Ifitisnlll.liubu!l!!~·~~~~ti~llW~llbeCOnSideredtenninated.

If you should decide to appeal the response you receive at Step II, you should send your Step 1II Appeal to the Director's
Office. P.O. Box 30003, Lansing, Michigan, 48909.

Name (first, last)
L.BJJB.E:£I\J...W~~.ER-

Numbo,
!'i+O~ _

r.>,NU. -Lln_,t;.j.itU.l..ti...l0n"'_...LL0.l..'"'"k

,Il~lbe~'_

_D"

,at,~er-r0Jrfl~nCJ',lidQcn4t-1.::';;:",1:-4-J
/,,,,r<:1

STEP II--Re son for Appeal '

• fesolution \ljyas reached at Step I. I am ~ubmittin!.l for resoilltion ~d
"a";&t..\Ver at Step IL

STEP II·-Response

Respondent's Name (Print)

Oat. Returned to

Date

. Grievant: --'Z~9-C.l./tf/--

NOTE: Only a copy of this appeal and the response will be returned to you. STEP IlI--Director's Response is attached as a separate sheet.
If you find the Step III Director's response unsatisfactory, you have the option of rererring the grievance to the Office of Legislative Corrections Ombudsman. 4th P100r, Capitol Hall. 115 W. Allegan, Lansing. Michigan, 48913.
t DISTRIBUTION: Whitc··CentraIOmcc; Green - Conary ••Step III; Pink•. Step II; Goldenrod-·Grievant

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 4 of 23
THIRD STEP GRlEVANCE RESPONSE
ROBERT WEISENAEUR, #157085 TeF,04-04-00370-27d
The Grievant presents an issue which alleges that Parole Board members apply incorrect rules for interviews. He is seeking the correct application of the rules as relief. This issue was non-grievable. ,It
the local level in accordance with the provisions of Policy Directive PD-03.02.130, titled "Prisoner/Parolee Grievances. The action of staff is in accordance with policy and procedure. A review at this level has not determined that any staff misconduct was demonstrated. Therefore. the
step one and two response is upheld and relief is not warranted at this level.
This investigator has reviewed the record presented with the appeal to step three. The record supports that staff properly responded to this grievance at step one and step two. Additional infomlation has not been presented to demonstrate an error in this d::terrnination. This decision is upheld at this level. TIllS grievance appeal is denied.
Approval Signature: ---:r,.'f'·:J!.!:'--~!.-".::":~".'';"'""--"=,'·.'·1.".,- ,------
# J/02 -10-05
ce: Warden Grievant

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 5 of 23

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2

( Filed 04/05/2005

Page 6 of 23
483$-4247 t0t94 CSI·241A

0.:, .") /
,~:t

..L.;~)

(/) ,I .'

Z / t >, /) What attempt did YOll make to resnlve this issue prior to writing this grievance?

If none, explain why. ....

I /

/;i,.9 A'<'!f;~ ..{"

,
>t-..,.:~<:.: ... _. I

Stale problem clearly. Usc separate grievam:e form for each issue. Additional pages, using plain paper, may be used. Four copies of each page and supporting docum"ms must be submiTted with this form. The grievance must be submitted to the Grievance Cooroinalor in accordance with the time limits of OP 03.02.130.

"jI _,(. ',..rj-"/.'/"·t.e.

, /

.. \"

0 0 RESPONSE (Grievantimcrviewed?

Yes No If No, give explanation. If resolved, explain resolution.)

Respondent's Signature

Date

Reviewer's Signature

Dme

_.=. ;:;:;._.=.....;. =._===t===..==-:::::.:...-_..:_-_._·.c.,.:.:-:: ==·-·;·:-=. c~~~·::=====

D'te Rerul1led t(l.

If resolved at Step I, Grievant ~ign h~r".

Gri~VfLn.t:

RGsaIul'Jon must be· (Ie·sen·beu· nt"lOVe.. Grievanes Signature

Date

-.-----~-------"---------.-----

DISTRIBUTION: White, Green. C1lnH.ry. Pink··Prnc·css iO StC'.p One,; G~)ldeTln)d··Grje."anl

Case 2:05-cv-71318-M(OB-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 0(4/05/2005 Page 7 of 23

Grievance

This gJievance is intended to run against all employees, agents, and agencies of the State of Michigan who have any influence on the composition, laws, policies, practices, and procedures of the Michigan Parole Board, including but not limited t.o the following individuals and entities:

A. Governor Jennifer M. Granholm B. Attorney General Mike Cox C. Pall-iela Caruso, Director ofthe Michigan Department of CotTeetions D. The Michigan Department of Coneclions
E. The Michigan Parole Board, and individually its members:

1. Chairperson John S. RUllitschun
2. Charles Braddock 3. William Slaughter 4. Mmjorie McNutt 5. Marianne Samper 6, George Lellis
7. Miguel BeJTios 8. James E, Atterbury 9. James J. Quinlan
10, Barbara S. Sampson

T, _flJ-L""IA. r(

r-7 , ,# Ie:;;" C',~

complain that the above-named

parties/agencies, by their collective or individual acts and omissions, or by their customs

and policies, have violated my constitutional rights under the state and federal constitu-

tions. Specifically, they have applied parole laws, rules, regulations, policies, procedures,

and practices retroactively in violation ofthe due process and expostfacto clauses,

In support o[my grievance, I state the following:

1.

In 1911r was convicted of a crime and sentenced to life in prison with

the possibility of parole (parolable life)_

2. At the time of my conviction and sentencing, a different parole regime existed than exists today.

3.

At that time parolable lifers had the right to have a personal parole inter-

view at frequent intervals, to be given reasons fora parole pass-over, to have a parole

pass-over treated as a denial of parole for purposes ofjudicial review, and to appeal such

an adverse decision to court. In addition, at that time parolable lifers were reviewed by

the board under the same, or neaTly the same, standards for parole as other inmates with

long indetenninate (tenn-of-years) sentences,

(

(

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 8 of 23

Gl;.evance Page Two

4. At the (ime, many Michigan judges viewed a parolable life sentence as more lenient than a long term-of-years sentence, because parole eligibility begml after just ten years instead of later, but was otherwise the same in viliually all respects.
5. Sinc,," 1994, Michigan's parole laws, policies, practices, and procedures have changed radically for the worse for me. According to the fonner parole board chair, since 1994 "life means life." I believe that since J994 there has becn almost no distinction between parolable lifo and mandatory life in Michigan,
6. The above-named people/agencies bave applied the Jlew parole laws, policies, practices, and procedures retroactively, to my detriment, and in violation ofths due process and ex post/acto clauses ofthe state and fedenll constitutions.
J tlJerefore request that r be reviewed for parole under the parole regime and the
parole standards that existed When I Was convicted and sentenced.

Date: -'-/,) ~/ ,2004

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOJ\oB.f.-TVJMNMD CMODoREcRuMEmCeOnTtRI1OA-2NNALDFFUileAdMC0'4·l/r0-5.r/2y005 Page 9 of 23

DATE:

APRIL 06, 2004

TO:

120287 McCULLUM

4C 18L

SUBJECT: HE,JECrED GRIEVANCE NRF 0404 0437 2SG

Your grievance is being returned to you with a brief explanation as to why it will not be processed at this time. R.e-submit your

grievance if the problem can be remedied in a timely fashion. If you have further questions about the grievance policy and procedure, please c'onsult PD 03.02.130 and 01' 03.02.130, much of which is summarized below.

o Your grieVllnce failed to Include sufficient informa.tion: State problem in the space provided. Additional pages may be used. Four copies of each additional page must be submillcd with your grievance form.

( ) The statement provided is iIIegibk:

( ) Grievance lacks: time, datc or amount of information relative to issue being grieved:

( ) Grievance lacks: Grievant's signature, number, facility or housing unit:

( ) Grievance lacks identity of the staff member addressed in this g1'ievance:

() Grievance is a property/money issue and does not include documentati(m to prove ownership, value, receipt or payment: ( ) A clear cnneise statement:

.

Untimely/Incomplete }'orm

() Grievance was not written and forwarded to the Grievance Coordinator within nine(9) business days of the incident being grieved:

Lack of Jurisdiction/Extraneous Informll!lon () You must forward the grievance to the institution being grieved: (X) l'I.itF. bas no jurisdiction over:
( ) Grievance i. based on outside informatiotl, there is no evidence to support you claim.

.

Frivolo~s/MuJtiple Issue/Other

( ). The grievance includes issues which are frivolous, clearly without merit or based 011 extraneous information: ( ) Multiple issues:

( ) Prohibited longuage:

( ) There was no attempt to resolve before filling grievance.

.'.

..

Duplicate

(X) Grievallce i. a duplicate and/or repetitive to a b>rievance previously med:

.

( ) Thi~ issue has been previously addresses hy the Grievance Coordinator. The grievance will not be processed further and will be

tiled for reference only.

MOdified Access () You are on·Moditied Access Status and have obtained tho attached·' b'Tievance from a source other that the Grievar.cc Coordinator. ~) Your Grievances. will be monitored for the next thirty(30) days. Any continued failure to adhere policy 03.02.130 will result in \IIotliJied Access status.

Non-grie\'able . ) Due to th~ expertise of their profession, decisioils made by Medical Personnel will not be questioned by this office.

: ) Deci.ions made lcarillgs pr()ce~s,

by

Hearings

Officers

in

major

or

tninor

misconduct

hearings

and

issues

directly

related

to

misconducts

01'

the

.) Decisiotls made· by Hearings OffIcet·s in hoarings conducted pursuant to Administrative Rule 791.3315 regarding proposed

:ccurity reclassification to segregation, visitor restrictions, special designations, and high or very high risk classification.

) The contents of Administrative Rules, Department Policy Directives and Procedures or Director's Office Memoranda.

) Two 01' more prisoners may 110t jointly Jile a single grievance regarding an issue of mutual impact·or submit identical or duplicate

ndividual grievances regardi.ng a givcn issue or as an organized protest. You may not file a grievance on the behalf of others.

) Decisions made by the Parole Board.

oC

) The grievance contains language that is profane, that represents a threat of physical ha1Tn or demeans the character, race

thnicity, physical appearance, sex, religion, national origin or offends any person will not be processed. UNLESS THE NECESSARY CORRECTION(S) IS MADE YCUR GRIEVANCE WILL NOT BE PROCES~ml)

APR 0 7 2004 Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 04/05/2005
, 'MICHIGA,N DEPARTMENT OFCORRL.; nONS
PRISONER/PAIWLEE GRIEVANCE APPEAL FORM
Dale Receivs-?,.py Grievance Coordinator
at Step II; -r-~::Jf..E.._"_,,.....

Page 104Ko:flJ·242348 tll97
C5J·247 I!

INSTRUCTIONS: THIS FORM [S ONLY TO BE USED TO APPEAL A STEP I GRIEVANCE,

Th(: white copy of the Prisoner/Parolee Grievanc(~ Form CSJ-247 A (or the goldenrod copy if you ~>]"nt been provid(~d

with a ~tep I response in a timely manner) MUST be attached to the white copy of thi:.t:£!l~jf~r~, 'IiI at both Step

Il and Step III,

e; CC ~(,:,~ , \\

~fd'b~!¥r~tI;\l'I&\1:l ~, If you "hould decide to, appeal the Step' I grievance ..espOl1se to Step II, your appeal

.

" "

dtj 19:/0 l'>J.tE ditaleLtb,st_"_ by

t:- ' Ifit is not submitted by this d~1 Jl\lllk cO~~i~o~(~*~1 ated.

[f you should decide to appeal the response you receive at Step II, you should send yo \lI6llilP1\,f~~~th,;"i;;ector's

Office, 1',0, Box 30001; Lansing, Michigan, 4g909,

",

---::---

r.:---:::--:-.---------' "c-;--;-----..--:-:-:-:----r.--:-:--;--:--r;:---;;-;--;-;----,-:::-,-",-._"",

Narlle (fif::;t, Ia.st)

Nurnbt:!f

In5;.(itution Lock NUl1l.hc.r Date of Incident Today's Dilte

STEP II,-Response
5"'8 .4rf, ~".,vrer,

Dale Received by Step 1I Respondent:
~-r..op

# , 6 f - Date Returned to Grievant:

Dale

.tf.-If..,

=,",",=,_,=,","",=,".,:.:.:=="'''"'="'--=========,_=-=-=__._=,_.,:;=,;;,;.-:::::c:;':'"'''' "'-"-

NOTE: Only a copy of this appeal and the response will be returned to you.
STEP III--Director's Response is attached as a separate sheet.
_ _ _'w................ ,·
_."",-' ......'.""""',.
If you find the Step III Director's response unsatisfactory, you have the option of referring the grievance to the Office of Legislative Corrections Ombudsman, 4th Floor, Capitol Hall, 115 W. Allegan, Lansing, Michigan, 48913.
DISTRIl3UTION: White--CentraIOmee; Green Canary ..Stepl'u; Pink-·Step II; Goldenrod--Grievnnt

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MO(B-VMM Document 1-2

( Filed 04/05/2005 Page 11 of 23

THffiD STEP GRlEVANCE RESPONSE

Eric McCullum, 11120287 NRF, 04-04-00437, 28C
This invcstigator has reviewed the record presented wjlh the appeal 10 step three. All relevant intonnation was considered. Based on this review, this writer finds the grievance was untimely l1Ied, violating the provisions of Policy Directive 03.02.130, titled "PrisoncrlParolce Grievances" and Operating Procedure 03.02.130, tilled "Prisoner/Parolee Grievances."
The grievance record supports the date of incident is coded as "Ongoing," whicli docs not represent a specific date of an alleged incident. The grievance was not received at step one un!i I 4-5-04. The Grievant failed to present any evidence to support he was prevented /Tom timely filing his grievance due to circumstances beyond his control. Furthermore, the responses provided at step one and two adequately address the merits ofthe main issue grieved. Based on this finding, we will not address the merits of the grievance further.
This grievance appeal is denied.

Approval Signature:
#4/5-26-04128C
c: Warden
Grievant

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 12 of 23

,·r··· ,.
Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2 MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS PRISONER/PAROLEE GRIEVANCE FORM

Filed 04(/0' 5/2005

Page 13 of 23
4835"4241 10/94 CSJ-247A

J,

•••• j

Date Received ~at~S;t;ep~I~ii~}iEiiTI]f23m;G~ri~e~va~n~c~eIdentifier:

I..;I~--L-L-LI-L...J.I_·.

.

L

..

L

-

L_I

L

.

--Lil_~":Li ,.'L.1"'iJ..1:.,.iJ..i

...J

// ,. "I'...i~ ,~t"1. f'·.·(.r'):·t,/,(.

J""t1 / '}~/...)/'/II,. ,.'.".

"
{,.>,'

''1I"";

.

'.1""r"

'

What attempt did you make to resolve this issue prior to writing this grievance? On what date? _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ If none. explain why.

J,atc problec\ clearly. Use separate grieVatlCe fOlm for each issue. Ad~itional pages. using plrun paper. may be used. Four copies of each page and supporting documents must be submitted with this fonn. The grievance must be submitted to the Grievance Coordinator in accordance with the time limits of OP 03.02.130.

,

Ii.)l"c' [fS"e.

,1·/ '-., /t'

I: /.. <: ( (

·1..,.··

.....

..., .'. ,.•~.,." ••._'.", ...•..•,...""..,." . " ...,. ···,·····"w· ., ."., ." .......,•.. '.~ ,......,._... .... ~.,,~"

DYes D RESPONSE (Grievant Interviewed'}

'...

·:'i

No If No. give explanation. If resolved. explain resolution.)

/ / ..'.. I l./ ,,'..

;.;..

,/.~.}"

f.·1 I .;..

""
!.

I.' I'
) .{ .. ,.,.I. ·... 1.)

,I
./

,.!,'r", ...

!'/.~."·i'./·I?·'':·',.'l,

Respondent's Signature

f

/

Respondent's Namc (Print)

Working Title

/" ...

I.

/"

.. ,; '. ., \.\. .. l i

\' , ,:.j" ,j

) \, .. ,I '

Reviewer's Signature

Reviewer's Name (Prim)

Da.. Returned to l 'i Grlevan~''\ . l// ll~II,'1
! iii rl., I I

If resolved at Step I, Grievant sign here, Resolution must be described above. Grievant's Signaturc

DISTRIBUTION: White, Groon. CIlrllU'Y, Pink··Procoss to Slep One; GOldenrod--Grievant

~ :'
.."1 ,1r! ,.!! f Date Working Title
Date

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 14 of 23
HESSELL, GERALD Ai50163 DRF 9578 ONGOING 6/29/04
Step I Grievance, in accordance with PD 03.02.130; Prisoner Litigation Reform Act (PLRA) and my First Amendment Right.
This grievance is intended to run against all employees, agents and agencies of the
State 01 Michigan who have any influence on the composition, laws, policies, practices, and
procedures of the Michigan Parole Board, including but not limited to the following individuals and entities:
A. Governor Jennifer M. GraI1holm B. Attorney General Mike Cox C. Patricia Caruso, Director of the Michigan Department of Corrections D. The Michigan Department of Corrections E. The Michigan Parole Board, aI1d individually its members:
1. Chairperson ,Iohn S. Rubitschun 2. Charles Braddock 3, William Slaughter 4. Marjorie McNutt 5. Marianne Sam per 6. George Lellis 7. Miguel Berrios 8. James E. Atterbury 9. James J. Quinlan 10. Barbara S. Sampson
I, JerrY. blillilHessell #A1501Q;j, complain that the above-named parties/agencies, by their collective or individual acts and omissions, or by their customs aI1d policies, have violated my constitutional rights under the state and federal constitutions. Specifically, they have applied parole laws, rules, regulations policies, procedures, and practices retroactively in violation of the due process and ex post facto clauses.
In support of my grievance, I state the following:
1. In 1l:3T6, I was arrested and subsequently convicted of a crime and sentenced,
1977, to life in prison with the possibility of parole (parolable life).
2. At the time of my conviction and sentencing, a different parole regime existed than exists today.
3. At the time, parolable lifers had the right to have a personal parole interview at frequent intervals, (under Parole Board Memo 8.02, the board interviewed parolable lifers at the conclusion of seven years and every three years thereafter, which created a "7+3+3 ... " mandatory hearing schedule. Between 1977 and 1982, during the periods of my conviction and sentence the parole statute did not govem the frequency of parole hearings. Instead, the MDOC devised its own rules to conduct parole hearings by, in 1977, promulgating Administrative rule 791.7710, which required the parole board to interview me after seven years, again after three years and every year thereafter, creating a mandatory interview schedule of "7+3+1+1..."), to be given reasons for a parole pass·over, to have a parole pass· over treated as a denial of parole for purposes of judicial review, aI1d to appeal such an adverse decision to court. In addition, at that time parolable lifers were reviewed by the board under the same, or nearly the same, standards for parole as other inmates with long indeterminate (term,

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 04(/05/2005 Page 15 of 23

of-years) sentences.

4. At the time, many Michigan judges viewed a parolable life sentence as more lenient than a long tarin-ai-years sentence, because parole eligibility began after just ten years
instead of later, but was otherwise the same in virtually all respects.

5. Since 1994, Michigan's parole laws, polices, customs and procedures have changed radically for the worse for me in Govemor Engler's response to an ex-convict being released and committing heinous crimes against society. According to the former parole board chair, since 1994 "life meanS life." I believe that since 1994 there has been almost no distinction between parolable life and mandatory life in Michigan.

6. The above-named people/agencies have applied the new parole laws, policies,

practices, customs and procedures retroactively, to my detriment, and in violation of the due

process and ex post facto clause of the state and federal constitutions.

.

I therefore request that I be reviewed for parole under the parole regime and parole standards that existed when I was convicted and sentenced.

Sincerely,

Dated: June 6, 2004

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 16 of 23

Michigan Department of Correction FIRST STEP GRIEVANCE RECEIPT

4835-0976 CAJ-976 11194

DATE:

7/1/04

TO:

HESSELL 150163

FROM;

Grievance Coordinator, R.DEVERS

"

SUBJECT: Receipt fix Step 1 Grievance

Your Step 1 grievance regarding PAROLE ISSUE OTHER was received in this ofiJce on 7/1/04 and you ~hould receive a response no later than 7/22/04. If you have not received a response by this date, or agreed to
an extension, you 1l1ay submit a written request for an appeal form to this office. You will need to notc Oll your request the grievance identHier that was assigned to your grievance. That idel1tificr is: DRF-04-07-0993-16.Z-

StepC'laGseric2v:l0ln5c-c,cvR-7e1s3p1o8ns-Me O( B-VMM NAME & NUM8ER Gerald L. Hes~ell, #150163

Document 1-2 Filed 04/05/2005 Grievance ID# DRF·04·07·0993· I6Z

Page 17 of 23

RESPONSE (GrieV:lnt Interviewed? DYes D No If No, give explanation. If re.olved, .'plain ,·esolution.)

The grievant is a prisoner sentenced to life under MCL 750,83 Assault to Murder, MeL 750.529 Robbery Armed, and MeL 750317 Murder 2"d Degree, by the Honorablc Waltcr p, Cynar. The grievant was sentenced 011 June 10, 1977. With 423 d~.ys ofjail time credit, his life sen.lel1ce began on April 13, 1976, This offence was committed on Apl'il12, 1976. According 10 Michigml DepaJtment of Corrections Policy Directive 06.05.104(1)( I) "Prisoners SC11tcnced for an offense committed before October I, 1992, are eligible for parole after serving ten calendar years of the life sentence," The grievm1t became parole
eligible after ~erving 10 <.:~lelldar year$ of his life sentence. He reached this thresho.ld on April 13, 1986.

Mel, 750.83, MCL 750.529, and MCL 750.314, all state that anyone (bund guilty of these felonies will be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for life or for any term of years. Judge Cynar sentenced the grievant to Ii fe, not U (enn of years.

Th: Parole Bom'd has adhered to the law in the grievant's case according to MCL 791.234(6)(a) whieh states "at the conclusion of 10 calendar years of the prisoner's sentence and thereafter as determined by the parole board until the prisoner is paroled, discharged, or deceased, and in accordance with the procedures described in subsection (7), 1 111ember of (he parole board shall interview the prisoner." In May of 1984, the Parole eOl1ducied the grievant's iniliallifer interview. Thereafter, the grievant has reeeived an interview in 1987, 1993, and 1999, ,The Parole Board recently reviewed the grievant's file in February of 2003 and by majority vote had no interest in taking action at this time, The grievant was sent u Notice tif Decision dated March 13,2003, with a decision date of Febl'llary 20, 2003, stating thk

Parole is not guaranteed when a Lifer becomes parole eligible. When the Parole Board reviews a life sentence, a number offactors arc taken into consideration. They include the nature m1d circumstances ol'lhe offense, any prior criminal history, the prisoner's risk factors for future assaultive behavior and property offenses, and the prisoner's institutional conduct and program involvement over the years.

TIle grievant cannot usc the Michigan Department oCCorrections Prisoner/Parolee Grievance Form to grieve the actions of the H0110rable Jennifer Granholm, Governor, or Mike Cox, Attorney GeneraL The writer can only speak for the Michigan Deparbnent of Corrections, Office of the Parole Board, and their actions. Through this investigation it is found the Michigan Parole Board has adhered to the Michigan Compiled Laws in the grievmlt's case. It is found this grievance has no merit.

Grievance denied.
Respondent's Name (I,,'int)

7/13/0¥

~~~1i-!-1)/["1

Oat.

ReVIewer's Sigmlture

Li fer/Col11l11utatig,l1,C 00!.2 Dave Kleinhardt, Manager

Wo.-king Title

Reviewer'S Name (Print)

DlIte Returned to
Grievant:

If resolved at Step I, Grievant sign here, Resolution must be described above. Grievant's Signatnre

.,----
Bate

y"'IPD JUL 212004 ',' '" ,

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 04./05/2005 Page 18 of 23 ,,'.;,,"\ I'", 0'

MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS

J : i:: ~B3j;::42~S 1:~197

I PRISONER/PAROLEE GRIEVANCE APPEAL FORM

Dale Recel'vedby Gn'evance ('.oord'malar al Step II:

G .

., I

nevance Identifier.

Hessell 150163
DRFI04070I99316Z
II. I.I.I

i,l', ::,!''-''CSJ:!41B

I ,.
JIIIii,iJ.,:II

'.,'.I2I6 I , ,, .

'~ORM r..Q.RJE.VANJ--:i~6~~j~I(}L INSTRUCTIONS: THIS

[S ONLY TO BE USED TO APPEAL A STEP

The while copy of the PrisoocrlParolee Grievance FonT) CS1.247A (or lhe g '\\!'o\)~\)~, ~WJuliiia 01 been provided

with a Slep I response in a tiITIely manner) MUST be attached to Ihe white c dfmlffoml if you a I it at both Step

II and Step III.

AUG II Ll 2J)[)4

If you ,hould decide to appeal the Step I grievance rcspon,c to Slep 11, your appe sh0i/;,\fuI?Jt?ii.lVfOOij.:1 ~

d

(,raREI... iew Plaza

by 07/29/2004 . Ifitisnotsubmit~dbythis~~~~~I~1iII 1!.W~la enninated.

P.O. Box 30003 Lansing Michigan 48909 If you should decide to appeal the response you receive at Step II, you should send your Step III Appeal 10 the Director's

Office, P.O. Box 30003, Lansing, Michigan, 48909.

Name (first, bstJ
tYer4/d

Number

Institu(i~n L(Jck. Number Date ~t'(;lcident Today's D(lIr.:

sSe!, Ir:LS-(J/It'3 OfF tff..7!3 th (Jill 7·(){J~.~t

S~EP V··Rea~(Jnf()rAppeal fle.-'5f1~I1dJ,.,.... i i..4" t!VIL~c!. +l...e iHille. '<t../k M..t~f'I$

It:r:.e. f w4..5, nI <L" (5fv'(. '''' 1177 /.,Jk.., 'i'r,-,!v~;,'" jJ'~d '1vllfy, frtev"'-l/i'{ <t.{f.,,'nq

tdVl4 ~/'1.e-!r<LI\.t- t,;r<'lIld d"l~ $tIn~ /J b'.d.fS., Va.-i11'1 (..<J ..... I wN rJ"«,e';6-I1! "' ..'01 Ii ~r'(f!,

6L~~f'I If}" /'Ii 'tfI.A.rj. }.knll! lJiT4.:rcl 'is ...... "h h4,-sk.r -Iod...., 1-A.tf'.Jop tYn t'/U".an--/ ',.,J,:r~tI

1\1+ ~I'Je I1U:l ri'ilfy ~I' /.It KNW AI2 LDoIlJd AAve....fa S4rve .:28y. y.fltir:J dJ'\. a. j>4'()/'

G b Ltc.
at;,.·</

t;/Q
6.r-(,

'-!Ii'r rn
bAt",:!

,

t!7N1'..:l1.~cJI-H1(',1L!'.!hfru,·l-.e1S:,+C; £t'15')+"t"'J't.>Ii t

j?f."lc4tt:ts I ~;'t:Je5 eNd r" l.es
f?! I!.!Jj {.reb dQ.uf..I.., tt57!1bz,S:l2

,/~ d
we.;-<!

J..t-
11,'1

l:,.ti,.hf l1~d •., 1"'77 w~ 1 fNNG..... c,...a.'sSz:n.J.t/";Z"d.

Date. Received by Step" Respondent:

-:::T4 tfN ,fetE (T:)t-fft( IV
Respondent's Name (Print)

'fL.,
sp()n~~~t"

I2ltA..:ltt../-'k-' I h?/DY' g~it:v~~:~" .d to
--0;;;;;---'''- 1

~9

STEP III-·Reason for Appeal 7M.. l'It't:y;';~I1c:bti M: NS" ~ d I'k", 7'j..., P",,,,,CL(/VNS -;;",.d

C v*,,,,,, 5' fJ.-..,; "'f'<,. &:hf t.,d·/I, i.e. J ·-/od...y ~-~ /fdIf ~ ~"'........ "'\.S 7'-A<?s.t. b.I";:

vxd i'r) /<i'77 /..<.kn 9l"'<--I'..v..nf ;;"'''-''':; ,:.,.f-{41Iy ~,.,./.eI1.<'~' -fo 1""",,.,,1.. 64. I.-A,

£,',4 +h;e .,.-H,+"',de /N. foi/.:lo'

. I

1.. .,,..-C1
I"" £)V'C-

( '?

/<:.'" 6' I' / 1> -

~H~/5l_~,i:iT/'!;'

"

(.1..145
4.. <'('<'

"/'It;::~'..f kin,?

"'pp4u:/

7 7.
•

"E")<' - 'j)CSTJ T.,J -A ("To!) C

v,.t..t... _

,o~ ~ A<r
,,., /..U'"," 1'''''-/''';'')

~P;.dY,,;/I<:':,'.
'-'

NOTE: Only a copy of this appeal and the response will be returned to you.

STEP I1I..Dircctor's Response is attached as a separate sheet.

If you find the Step 1II Director's response unsalisfaclory, you have the option of referring the gl'ievance to the Office of Legislative Corrections Ombudsman, 4th Floor, Capitol Hall, I IS W, Allegan, Lansing, Michigan, 48913.

DISTRIBUTION: Whilc..CcntralOffke: Green· Canary --Step III; Pink.. Slcp II; Goldenrou--Oricvant

': '

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MO( B-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 19 of 23

Step II Grievance Response Hessel!, Gerald #150163
RI!:SPONSI!: (GrievDnt Interviewed? ClYcs [J No

Grievance ID# DRF-04-07-0993-16Z;
If No, give .xplam.tion. If resolved, explain resolution.)

You are disputing the respon~e YOll received at Step I.
Your Ole has been reviewed at Step II.
You are serving a life sentence tor Assault to Murder, Robbery Armed and Murder 2nd. The response you received at step I was appropriate. Your case has been reviewed in accordance with MeL 79 1.234 (6) (a) and 1'0-06.05.104 (Parole Process)
Grievance denied.

Parole Board Chairperson, John S. Rubitsc.htm Respondent's Name

!) !I-f:- I -{I.-, f:P::tLi CtA"-,-,-"
ondent' Signature

~h?/(ju
~ Date

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MO(B-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 04/(05/2005 Page 20 of 23

THIRD STEP GRlEVANCE RESPONSE

,

, HESSELL

"',,,

,

GEM.• ' WH15(iiJ63

DRF·04·07-00993·16z

The glievant alleges that he was sentenced in 1977 to a life sentence with the possibility of
parole, Grievant ~tIeges that at the lime he was sentenced, a different parole regime existed than exists today. Grievant alleges that as of 1994 there has becn no distinction between parolable life and mandatory life in Michigan. Grievant seeks as relief to be reviewed for parole under the
parole regime and parole standards that existed when he'was convicted and sentenced.

This investigator has reviewed the record presented with the appeal to Step Three. All relevant information was considered. Based on this review, this writer find~ the responses provided at
Steps One and Two adequately addres& the meJits of the main issue grieved.

The record presented with the appeal docs not suggest that further action is justified at this level. The record indicates that the grievant has been given parole consideration as required by PD
06.05.104 "Parole Process", There is no requirement in policy that a prisoner be issued a p'arole
even though he may be eligible for parole.
The grievant has not shown a violation of (Jolicy. This grievance appeal is denied,

Approval Signature: ~:w.:._ k~itj

#7/11-02·04/166

(f

",,_.._

Date:

_~111-/L{,lo¥I.fl".:,;~j~_
II r

cc: Warden Prisoner

I

JS 44 1119C9 ase 2C:0IV5-IcLv-C7O13V1E8-RMOSHB-EVEMTMCOUNTDYIoNWcHuICmHTeHlnstAc1Tl-o2NARos~F:.il.e.:d.w0.:4./.0:a5:/<2.y0::0;5ne:...P'_aDg-=e5_2-1113Iogf 2p3J GEl VJl.IM
The JS~44 civil cover sheEit and the information contained herein neither replace nor supplement the filing and serviC$ of pleadings or other papers as required
by law, except.as provided by local rules of c;ourt. This form, .approved by the Judi¢lal Conference of tha United States in September 1974. is requirad
(or use of the Clerk of Court for the purpose of initiating the civil docket sheet

I. (a) PLAINTIFFS

DEFENDANTS

Kenneth Foster-Bey, John Alexander. Waymon Kincaid, William Sleeper, Robert Weisnaucr, EJic McCullum, Jerry Lee Hessel

See Attached

(bl county of Residence of First Li,tad

Wayne

County of Resldonc. of First Listed

Ingham

NOTE: IN LANO CONDEMNATION CASES, USE THE LOCATION OF tHE

(CI Attorney's (Firm Namo, Address, and relephone Number)
See Attached

Attotneys (If Known)
05-71318

LJ 2 U,S. Gov.rnment
Defendant

o 4 Diversity (lndlcate Citizenship of P~rti~s In Il,m 1111

IV. NATURE OF SUIT CONTRACT

PlacE! an "X" In One Sox Onl
TORTS

0 0 Citizen or Subjoct of a 3 3 Foreign Nation r i nCo

FORFEITtJR8/PENAJ.,rv

IlANKRUPTCY

[15
OTH8R STATUTES

CJ '1 1 0 InsLll'anOO

0 120 Marine

0 130 Miller Act

0 140 Negotiable In$Ul.lfl'lent

0 150 Recovety of

5[1

o~'erpayment and Enforcement of Judgment

161 Medicare Act

0 152 Recovery of DefaUlted Student L.oan!;l
SCJ (E~Cl, Vflt{triiln!;l) 153 R&C(Pvery ot O'it'tll'P~ym.nl Qf Veteran's B9riefits
O§ eo 0 1 Stockholders' Suits 190 Other COr'lt~ct
195 Gontrl;lct Produd Lizl.lliflty

PERSONAL INJURY
0 31 0 Aitplane 0 315Airplana Ptodl,Jct
Liability 0
320 A$S/ll,Jlt Libel And Slander
0 330 fli!Q9n:11 Emptc)lIiII'5'
I,..lolIbilily
0 340 Marif'le 0 345 Manna Product
Litlbltlty 0 350 Motor Vehicle
0 355 Motor Vehicla
PrOduot l.iililbility
0 360 Other Personal
Injury

ReAL PROPERTY

CIVil RIGHTS

0 ~10 L.~nd Condamnation 0 ~20 Foreclosura 0 23Q ~lInt LI!I2Istl &. Ejedment 0 240 forb II) Land 0 24$ Tort Product Liability
0 ,290 All O!t'ltlt Real ProP9rty

0 441 Voting 0 442 Employment
D 443 HCJI,i$lngl
Aerommod9~I(ln~
0 444 Welfare 0 440 Other Civit Rig

PERSONAL INJURY 0 t'i10 Agriculture

tJ 422 APPMI 26 USC 1058

0 362 Parsoncr.llnJuryF 0 620 Other Food & Drug

Mad. Malpraotice 0 625 Drog R"latC!lu StllzlJre 0 42.3 Withdrawal

o 365 ~.ro~Du6\~laIn¥II,& •

[1

of PruptYly 21: 681 630 Liquor Laws

28 USC 157

0 368 A$M$tos Personal 0

Injury Produ(;t

Liability

0

640 R.R. & TM::k 650 Airlinl) Regs.

D 860 occupptlonal

PERSONAL PROPERTY

Safety/Health

o 370 Other Fraud o 371 Truth In Landing

0 eao Othar

D 3aO Other Personal

","OR

Property Damill9~
0 385 property Damege

D

Produd Li@ili!), 0

PRISONER PoTITIONS

0

0 51 0 Motion$ to Va!';~te

SentanC(I

0

HaMel\! Corpus:

"", 71 0 FiliI Let/or Sl'l1d.m:ls
720 l~l)or/Mgmt. Relations
730 U~~.;InMgmL R~portlra
s Pisl:ilc5Ura Act
740 Rih\ilw{t~ Lebor Act

30 GElneral 5 Death PM~lty 540 andam\.l6 &. ()th~r

0 if)O Other Labor LiUgation
D 791 Empl. Ret Inc.

55 ivil Rlgtll:$

SeC\.lrity Act

P(lson Condition

PROPERlY RtGHTS

0 820 Copyrighl.$
D 830 Patont 0 840 Tr~damark

SOCIAL SECURITY

0 0

1l<i1 H IA (1 395ff)
ae2 Black Lung (923)

0 863 DIWCfDIWVV 14Q5(9))

CJ0 864 SSID Tille XVI 865 RSI (40'(MI

1!5DSRAL TAX BUITS
o 870 T,a:xe, (U.S. Plaintiff
Of Defendant)

o 871 IRS-Thil'd Party 26 USC 7609

o 400 $1<:1le (~$.apportlOnment o 41 0 Antitrust
l.J 430 Banks and i3;)nKing Ll 450 Commercl1l1CC
o 480 DooOl1<'11101'
D 470 Ri:!ckctliltlr InnUtltlood &
CO!lUf/t Of!jarllzaUOll8
o 910 SeleotivEI Servi(;e o 850 Sacu rltlli!~ICl'lm mod iUI!~1
El(ctlanae
o 875 CU$tome:r Challenge 12 USC 34'10
o 691 Agricl,Jltural Act::; o 892 economic $labilizi:I\it:.l(l AoL o 893 ~n ... iranmemlal Ml:ltters
D S94 Energy Allocation ~\ct
o 895 Freedom of
InformMiol' Act
o (loa ~lt:~~~~~ Unn~f !iqu2I1 ACI.lC!l~1I to JlJtl~IC.e
D 950 Constitutionality 01 51a\0 Stat~jte$
o 890 rntIer $191lJiO'1' Adion~

(PLACE AN "X" IN ONE a

0 tigln(11

2 Remove

Procalleding

StllltoC

SSIB:tE

AppC.'(ll to
o District 7 Judge from
MEI~i$tr"'te-

. CAUSE OF ACTION (Cita thG u.s. Civil Statute under which you are filing lind write brief ststement or caU$EI.
00 not <;ita jurisdIctional $l~tl,lteB unless div~miity.j

See Attach«J

VII. REQUESTED IN COMPLAINT:
•• Viii. RELATED CASE(S) instruclionsl:
IF ANY
DATe.

$ DEMAND
JUDGe Hon. Avern Cohn
SIGNATURE OF ATTORNEY OF RECY'"
l>J~ l2..;'IIW

~TURY DEMll.ND:

~OCKET
NUMBER

04-CY·71090-DT

PURSCUasAeN2:T05T-cOv-7L1O3C18A-MLORBU-VLMEM83.1D1ocument 1-2 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 22 of 23

1.

Is this a case that has been previously dismissed?

If yes, give the following information: Court: ___________________________________

DYes
[gJ No

Case No.: ____________________

Judge: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _~_

2.

Other than stated above, are there any pending or previously discontinued or dismissed companion cases in this or any other court, including state court? (Companion cases are matters in which

oIKl Yes No

it appears substantially similar evidence will be offered or the same

or related parties are present and the cases arise out of the same

transaction or occurrence.)

If yes, give the following information: Court: Eastern District of Michigan

Case No.: 04·CY·73953·DT

Judge: Hon. Robert H. Cleland

Notes: This is a 1983 class aClion; the previous cases were individual actions brought .in habeas.

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 1-2 Filed 04/05/2005 Page 23 of 23
Attachment for Civil Cover Sheet
l(a) DEFENDANTS: John S. Rubitschun, James Atterberry, Miguel Berrios, Chill'les Braddock, Stephen Deboer, Enid Livingston, James Quinlan, Marianne Samper, Barbara Sampson, Artina Hartman, Patricia L. Caruso
l(c) Attorney's Finn Name, Address and Telephone Number Paul D. Reingold Michigan Clinical Law Program 363 Legal Research Building 801 Monroe St. Ann Arbor, MI48109-1215
VI. CAUSE OF ACTION This action is for declaratory and injunctive relief under 42 U.S.C. Section. 1983. The plaintiffs are prisoners in the custody of the Michigan Department of COiTections who were sentenced to parolable life tenns before October 1, 1992. The plaintiffs challenge the defendants' retroactive use of parole standards and parole laws and policies that were not in effect when the plaintiffs were convicted. Such use violates the ex post facto and due process clauses of the United States Constitution.

