Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 102 Filed 09/28/2005 Page 1 of 2

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT EASTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN
SOUTHERN DIVISION __________________________________

KENNETH FOSTER-BEY, et al., on behalf of themselves and all others similarly situated,
Plaintiffs, vs.

File No. 05-CV-71318-DT Hon. Nancy G. Edmunds

JOHN S. RUBITSCHUN, et al., in their official capacities,

U.S. Mag. Judge Virginia Morgan

Defendants. ___________________________________/

Michigan Clinical Law Program By: Paul D. Reingold (P-27594) Attorneys for Plaintiffs 363 Legal Research Building 801 Monroe Street Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1215 (734) 763-4319

Office of the Attorney General By: Kevin Himebaugh (P-53374) Attorneys for Defendants Corrections Division P.O. Box 30217 Lansing, MI 48909 (517) 335-7021

Consolidated Companion Case

ANTHONY LYNCH-BEY, et al., on behalf of themselves and all others similarly situated,
Plaintiffs, vs.

Hon. Nancy G. Edmunds [File No. 05-72378-DT]

JOHN S. RUBITSCHUN, et al., in their official capacities,

U.S. Mag. Judge Virginia Morgan

Defendants. ______________________________________________________________________________

ORDER DISMISSING CLAIMS AGAINST THE DEFENDANTS IN THEIR INDIVIDUAL CAPACITIES AND AMENDING THE CASE CAPTION

1

Case 2:05-cv-71318-MOB-VMM Document 102 Filed 09/28/2005 Page 2 of 2
The Foster-Bey plaintiffs and defendants having stipulated that because the plaintiffs seek only declaratory and injunctive relief, their claims are properly brought against the defendants only in their official capacities,
IT IS ORDERED that the plaintiffs’ claims against the defendants in their individual capacities are dismissed, and that the case caption be amended accordingly.
SO ORDERED.
s/Nancy G. Edmunds Nancy G. Edmunds United States District Judge Dated: September 28, 2005 I hereby certify that a copy of the foregoing document was served upon counsel of record on September 28, 2005, by electronic and/or ordinary mail. s/Carol A. Hemeyer Case Manager
2

