The techniques presented so far pay little attention to the ways used by humans to create the summaries themselves.    BIB62604486 on the other hand, try to simulate the human cognitive process of professional summarizers. They aim at developing an empirical model for summarization, based on professional summarizers, and to implement this model into a system, which will "imitate" human process of summarizing. For this purpose, they recruited six professional summarizers who worked on 9 summarization processes. The whole process included the division of the tasks of the professional summarizers into sub-tasks, the interpretation of each sub-task into a more formal framework (i.e. giving a name, functional definition, etc.), and the hierarchical organization of the resulting strategies according to their function. Despite the diversity of the technical background and cognitive profile of each professional summarizer and their idiosyncrasies on creating summaries, the results are quite stunning.  . SimSum is implemented as an object-oriented blackboard, which involves 79 object-oriented agents, each one performing a relatively simple task. For instance, the Context agent checks whether the context conditions of the query are met by an input document, the TexttoProposition agent transforms input sentences into propositions known to the domain ontology, the Redundancy agent checks if a proposition has already been introduced. All the agents cooperate in order to deliver the summary. They can access a common knowledge database, which contains the text and ontology concepts. Furthermore several RST relations have been implemented for discourse level structures of the text.