Two representative categories of extractive techniques implemented by existing systems (see Table 1 ) are presented below. The first one concerns statistical techniques based on what [8: p 47-53] calls the Edmundsonian paradigm. In this paradigm, each sentence should be ranked in relation to the other sentences, so that the n highest ranked sentences could be extracted and form the summary. The ranking is normally based on a formula, which assigns a weight to each sentence based on various factors. For example, the cue phrases or keywords that the sentence contains, its location in the document, the fact that it may contain some non trivial words that are also found in the sections' headings of the document. The problem is that most of the times the produced summary is suffering from incoherencies (semantic gaps, anaphora problems). Some of the systems falling under this category post-process the produced summary using revision techniques in order to resolve such problems. The second category of extractive techniques concerns the creation of a graph (or tree) representation of the document(s) to be summarized exploiting machine learning and/or language processing techniques. Several different representations can be used: • The nodes of the graph are the paragraphs of the document to be summarized and the edges represent the similarity between the paragraphs they connect. The paragraphs corresponding to nodes with many edges can be extracted in order to form the summary of the document. • The nodes of the graph are text items such as words, phrases, proper names and the edges are cohesion relationships between these items, such as coreference, hypernymy. Once the graph for the document is created, the most salient nodes in the graph can be located, based for example on a user query. The set of salient nodes can then be used to extract the corresponding sentences, paragraphs, or even sections that will form the summary. • A tree representation can be created exploiting relations from the Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) BIB60514661 . The tree nodes are sentences, which are connected using RST relations such as elaboration, antithesis, etc. Then in order to get the most salient sentences, the tree must be traversed in order to build a partial ordering of the sentences in terms of their importance. According to the target compression rate, the top n sentences can be extracted and presented as a summary. Table 1 presents representative systems employing the extractive techniques presented above, taking into account the factors specified in Section 2.1. The input field concerns the number of input documents, their language, and whether they contain only text. The purpose field concerns whether the resulting summary is indicative or informative (in most of the cases it is difficult to judge this), generic or user-oriented, as well as whether the technique is a general purpose or a domain specific one. The output field concerns the "material" used to create the summary (sentences, paragraphs, sections). The table also includes a field about the specific methods used (e.g. statistics, language processing, use of revisions, etc.), as well as a field on the evaluation approach. The lack of the corresponding information in some field values denotes that a definite answer cannot be given.