In this section, work on multimedia summarization is discussed. This involves such diverse fields as dialog summarization, summarization of diagrams, and video summarization. Due to the limited number of relevant works and their field-specific features, only one approach per field is presented. Dialogue summarization: BIB59710599 BIB8497733 works on dialogue summarization in unrestricted domains and genres. Zechner's works with transcripts of human dialogs, which are generated either manually or automatically (in this case Zechner also addresses the issue of speech recognition errors). The major steps in Zechner's work are the following. In the first step, input tokenization, all noise is removed and the transcript is tokenized. Disfluency detection follows in which false starts, restarts or repairs and filled pauses are annotated and corrected. In this step the boundaries of the speakers' sentences are also detected. In the next step, cross-speaker information linking, pairs of question-answer among the speakers are identified and annotated. Those pairs are extracted together later when producing the summary, thus making the resulting summary more coherent and informative. The following step is topic segmentation where segments of the discussion on a certain topic are identified and a list of keywords, for each topic, is extracted. The final step, sentence ranking and selection, uses a version of the Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR) algorithm BIB6334682 to create a summary of extracted sentences, for each topic. Diagram summarization:  presented a preliminary and only partially implemented work on diagram summarization, yet quite innovative. His aim was to present a summary of the diagrams in a scientific paper, either by selecting (i.e. extracting) one or more diagrams from the paper or by distilling (i.e. simplifying) a diagram, or even by merging several diagrams. Futrelle assumes that a structural description of the diagrams can be obtained as metadata from the author or by parsing the diagrams. In order to achieve his goals he takes into account not only the structural description of each diagram, but the text in its caption or in the diagram itself. Video summarization:  extract information from various media in order to provide a summary of a broadcast news story. They use MITRE's Broadcast News Navigator (BNN; BIB5752508 ) which helps searching and browsing of news stories, not from just one channel, but from a variety of sources. They use silence and speaker change from the audio, anchor and logo detection from the video and closed-captioned text in order to segment the stream into news stories. For the purpose of presenting a summary, they experiment with a diversity of presentation methods, which include mixed-media. The first one is key-frames, i.e. important single frames and shots i.e. an important sequence of frames. The second one is extracted single sentences, based on weights according to the presence of named entities (organizations, persons and places). The final one is named entities keywords.