Although the production of summaries from multiple documents is usually done with abstractive techniques, BIB951982 BIB6573313 follow a different approach. They argue that different types of summaries, such as indicative or informative, serve different informational purposes and both can be useful, and that extracting sentences for the creation of an informative multi-document summary "is well accepted since it is simple, fast and easy to evaluate". Their system, Centrifuser, which is the summarization engine of the PERSIVAL (PErsonilized Retrieval and Summarization of Image, Video and Language) project  , produces both indicative and informative multi-document summaries, with the aim of highlighting the similarities and differences among the documents. The input to the Centrifuser is articles, retrieved by the search engine of the PERSIVAL system according to the patient record and the user query. For each article they create a topic tree which depicts the sectioning of each article. A composite topic tree is then created by merging together all the topic trees and adding details to each node such as relative typicality (i.e. how typical is that topic compared to the rest of the topics), position within the article, and various lexical forms in which it may be expressed BIB951982 . In the next step they try to match the nodes of the topic trees with the query. The matched nodes do not contain any text, but instead they point to sections in the original documents, from which the most representative sentences should be extracted. Since the compression rate posed will not always allow for each topic to receive a sentence, the first step is to choose which topics are going to receive a sentence. In the next step they choose for each topic the representative sentences. The final step for the creation of the summary involves the ordering of those sentences, which is achieved by first ordering the topics according to each topic's typicality, and then ordering the sentences themselves inside every topic, according to the physical position of every sentence.