During the last few years, a number of specialized health directories and catalogs (portals) have been created, such as CliniWeb  , HON 8 , CISMeF 9 , Medical Matrix, Yahoo Health, HealthFinder. Some of these catalogs, including the first three of the above, are additionally indexed with the MeSH Thesaurus. This allows complex queries to be stated, which exploit the hierarchical structure of the MeSH. CliniWeb, for instance, provides clinically oriented information, including: 1. Cataloging content per-page basis; 2. Including only pages that have clinical content, i.e., excluding individual and institutional home pages, advertisements, and lists of links; 3. Indexing with a higher level of specificity, using MeSH as opposed to broad subject categories such as Orthopedics or Cancer. CliniWeb provides access to Web pages manually indexed by a large subset (trees A-G) of MeSH, including the major trees, Diseases, Anatomy, and Chemicals and Drugs. Another example of a health resources portal is CISMeF, which aims to describe and index the main French-language health resources to assist health professionals and consumers in their search for electronic information available on the Internet. In April 2002, the number of indexed resources totaled over 9,600 with a mean of 50 new sites each week. CISMeF uses two standard tools for organizing information: the Medline bibliographic database MeSH thesaurus and several metadata element sets, including the Dublin Core. To index resources, CISMeF uses four different concepts: "meta-term", keyword, subheading, and resource type. CISMeF contains a thematic index, including medical specialities and an alphabetic index. Web pages included in catalogs, such as the above ones, form a different type of medical documents. These are .html pages, which may contain information from other media apart from text (e.g. images, videos). Even in the case that they contain text only, there will be links pointing to other relevant pages with interesting information for the summarization task, there may be interesting information stored in a table, etc. Web page layout should also be taken into account in order to locate interesting information inside the web page, especially in the case that the catalog pages are generated dynamically from a database. In addition, the identification of web pages that are relevant to the summarization task, demands the use of web spidering techniques. Therefore, as it is the case of web information retrieval and extraction tasks in other domains (see the results of the CROSSMARC project 10 in  ), summarizing from web documents needs to take into account the web catalog and web pages structure and features. It must also be able to exploit metadata information (e.g. MeSH annotations) already used by some of the existing web catalogs. However, even in the cases where a web catalog is not indexed, the summarization system must be able to employ existing medical ontologies, thesauri or lexica. This is essential for a scientific domain with rich terminology, where the information to be extracted or summarized needs to be as precise as possible.