The work presented in BIB17065522 is part of the PERSIVAL project mentioned above. In their study they are concerned with echocardiograms (ECGs). ECGs are usually videotaped for archival purposes and recently they have started to be transcribed into a digital format, which helps clinicians, and facilitates the task of summarizing them. Summarizing an ECG, and video in general as seen in the work of  , involves extracting the most interesting video frames, which are called key frames, which enable the user to easily navigate through the ECGs and view their essential parts. For BIB26235451 summarizing an ECG involves two things: parsing the ECG and selecting the key frames. The aim of the parser is to temporally segment the sequences of the video into smaller units, which are called shots. A shot is a sequence of frames in which the camera is uninterrupted. In the context of ECG videos, a shot corresponds to a single position and angle of the ultrasound transducer. The method they use for the parsing is a special case of the algorithm presented in BIB13437176 . The next step is the key-frame selection, which extracts the most informative (important) frames in the sequence of the video. After mentioning several methods for extracting key-frames, they conclude that for the context of ECGs key-frames are "the local extrema of the cardiac periodic expansive-contractive motion", since "the time at which the cardiac motion changes from expansive to contractive corresponds to the enddiastole and the time at which the motion changes from contractive to expansive corresponds to endsystole". Having performed the above two tasks, they create two summaries which they call static and dynamic. • Static summary. This summary, in essence, is constituted from the selection of the extracted keyframes, and it is useful for browsing the content of the echo video. • Dynamic summary. This summary, also called clinical summary among the clinicians, is a concatenation of the small extracted sequences of the video. They chose to extract one (or more, based on the needs of the clinicians) cycle of the heart motion, known also as R-R cycle. By joining those segments of videos they create the dynamic summary. [60], follow a similar approach to BIB26235451 in order to parse the video stream into physical units. Then video group detection, scene detection and clustering strategies are used to mine the video content structure. Various visual and audio feature processing techniques are utilized to detect some semantic cues, such as slides, face and speaker changes, etc. within the video, and these detection results are joined together to mine three types of events from the detected video scenes (presentations by doctors or experts on video topics, clinical operations to present details of diseases, and dialogs between doctors and patients). Based on mined video content structure and event information, a scalable video skimming and summarization tool, ClassMiner, has been constructed to visualize the video overview and help users access video content. Their system utilizes a four layer video skimming, where levels 4 through 1 consist of representative shots of clustered scenes, all scenes, all groups, and all shots of the video, respectively.