Despite the plethora of medical journals, most of them are not freely accessible over the Web, due to copyright reasons. Luckily, there are other online databases, which contain the abstracts and citation information of most articles on the general field of Medicine. One such online database is MEDLINE 2 , which contains abstracts from more than 3500 journals. MEDLINE provides key-word searches and returns abstracts that contain the keywords. The abstracts are indexed according to the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) 3 thesaurus. Apart from the access to the abstracts, MEDLINE also provides full citations of the articles along with links to the articles themselves, in case they are online. BIB15094383 have created a corpus from Medline, which consists of titles and abstracts from articles of 270 Medical Journals over a period of five years. This corpus is annotated with information such as the Medline identifier, MeSH terms assigned by humans, title, abstract, publication type, source and authors. The corpus was created for the experiments described in BIB15094383 . Abstracts represent a different type of document, since they are only composed of text and metadata (such as the MeSH annotations in MEDLINE). A summarization system must be able to exploit these metadata in several ways. For instance, in multi-document summarization, the system must be able to locate first those abstracts that discuss a specific topic, and topic information is found on the metadata of the abstracts. On the other hand, a sublanguage analysis of the abstracts may be necessary in order to identify certain characteristics that may affect the performance of the language processing application. As it is noted in Ariadne Genomics NLP white paper 4 , their sub-language analysis indicated that "MEDLINE sentences often include idiosyncratic linguistic constructs not necessarily reflected in generalized English grammar". This explains, as they claim, why existing syntactic parsers with general grammar are not suitable for dealing with this type of text.