[2] define multi-document summarization as the process of producing a single summary of a set of related source documents. As they note, this is a relatively new field where three major problems are introduced: (1) recognizing and coping with redundancy, (2) identifying important differences among documents, and (3) ensuring summary coherence. While a technique extracting textual units -such as sentences -from a single document, may cope with redundancy and preserve the coherence of the original document, extracting textual units from multiple documents increases the redundancies and incoherencies, since textual units are not previously connected across documents. Thus, abstractive techniques seem more appropriate for multi-document summarization. However, extractive techniques can also be used followed by a post-processing stage in order to ensure summary coherence and cope with redundancy. In both cases, the first step is to identify those documents talking about a specific topic. This can be done, using classification techniques in terms of relevance to a query or existing topic models, or using clustering techniques. The next step is to identify the important information to be added in the summary in the group of the topic-specific documents. In the extractive-based category, a system can apply firstly extractive techniques to each document separately in order to locate and rank the most important document regions (phrases, sentences, paragraphs). The highest ranked regions from all the documents can then be combined and re-ranked using similarity measures, in order to minimize redundancy. Some cohesion rules can then be applied to the final set of document regions in order to produce the summary. Another approach would be to work with all the documents from the beginning. For instance, the topic model produced from the group of input documents can be compared to sentence vectors from all the documents in order to get the, most similar to that topic, sentences. The abstractive-based category can also involve extractive techniques at a pre-processing stage. In such a case, the extracted document regions are linguistically processed in order to be converted into some representation, which can be used by a NLG system, which will then produce the abstract. Another approach involves the establishment and use of a set of intra-and inter-document relationships, which could hold between various textual units of the documents, such as words, sentences, paragraphs or whole documents, and which could guide the identification of the most salient information across the multiple documents. Such relationships concern not only the similarities across documents, but also their differences (e.g. equivalence, contradiction, elaboration, etc.). To cope with the inherent problems of multi-document summarization (redundancy, incoherencies), a different output representation can be used instead of producing a summary containing, for instance, the most salient sentences across documents or even their abstraction. BIB10216129 use a scatter plot per topic presenting the extracted sentences visually to the user. Table 3 includes representative examples of multi-document summarization techniques. Compared to Tables 1 and 2 , there are differences concerning the values in the output and the method fields. The output field concerns whether the output is an extract or abstract or even another representation format. The method field is filled with the specific methods used (statistical, language processing, revision stage, use of intra-and inter document relationships).