One of the projects belonging in this category is MiTAP BIB62660766 . The aim of MiTAP (MITRE Text and Audio Processing) BIB14264905 is to monitor infectious disease outbreaks or other biological threats by monitoring multiple information sources such as epidemiological reports, newswire feeds, email, online news, television news and radio news in multiple languages. All the captured information is filtered and the resulting information is normalized. Each normalized article is passed through a zoner that uses human-created rules to identify the source, date, and other fields such as the article title and body. The zoned messages are processed to identify paragraph, sentence and word boundaries as well as part of-speech tags. The processed messages are then fed into a named entity recognizer, which identifies person, organization and location names as well as dates, diseases, and victim descriptions using human-created rules. Finally, the document is processed by WebSumm BIB9177142 , which generates a summary out of modified versions of extracted sentences. For non-English sources, a machine translation system is used to translate the messages automatically into English. In addition to single-document summarization, MiTAP has recently incorporated two types of multidocument summarization: Newsblaster 14 BIB16717368 automatically clusters articles and generates summaries based on each cluster, Alias I 15 produces summaries on particular entities and generates daily top ten lists of diseases in the news. Another project is MUSI  . MUSI stands for "MUltilingual Summarization for the Internet" and it is a cross-lingual summarization system, which uses articles from The Journal of Anaesthesiology as input. The journal is freely accessible online  and its articles are written in Italian and English. MUSI takes those articles and creates summaries from them in French and German. The system is query-based and it extracts sentences from the input article according to the following criteria: cue phrases, position of the sentences, query words and compression rate. That is, MUSI follows the Edmundsonian paradigm for the selection of the sentences. Once the sentences have been extracted, two approaches can be followed: either they are used as they are to form the extractive summary or they are converted into a semantic representation to produce an abstractive summary. A third project exploiting extractive techniques is presented in BIB17065522 . The most important aspect of this approach is that it ranks the extracted sentences according to the so-called cluster signature of the document. More specifically, their prototype system takes medical documents (result of a query using a search engine) as input and clusters them into groups. These groups are then analyzed for features with high support, called key features, forming a cluster signature that best characterizes each document group. The summary is generated by matching the cluster signature to each sentence of the document to be summarized. Both the sentence and the cluster signature are represented using a vector space model. The ranked sentences are then selected and presented to the user as a summary. BIB17065522 used for their experiments abstracts and full texts from the Journal of the American Medical Association.