The most straightforward way of creating abstracts is to identify in a way the most important information in the document(s), appropriately encode it and then feed it to a Natural Language Generation (NLG) system BIB8460470  , which generates the summary. Two representative categories of abstractive techniques, implemented by existing systems (see Table 2 ), are presented below. In the first category the process of identifying and encoding the most important information in the document(s) can be performed using prior knowledge about the structure of this information. This knowledge is represented through cognitive schemas such as frames, scripts, templates. Thus, in such cases, the summary produced is not a generic one, but a rather user-oriented one since the schema can be considered as a sort of user query. Different approaches in this category may be the following: • Use of a script, i.e. a sort of a simple-structured template with slots identifying common important events over a domain. There is a separate script for each domain. When a document is processed, the corresponding script is activated and its slots filled with information from the document. The activation can be performed through the appearance of certain words, or by the activation of another script. After the script has been activated and filled, the summary can be generated using in most cases simple techniques (canned text generation vs. the more sophisticated NLG techniques) due to the rather simple structure of scripts. • Use of a MUC 1 -like domain-specific template, a sort of a relational database, having a more complex structure compared to scripts. The template can be filled from a document using information extraction techniques. The filled templates can then be processed in order to transform them in an appropriate form for the NLG system. Processing is done using various semantic operators, such as Change of Perspective, Contradiction, Addition/Elaboration, Refinement, Agreement, etc. The second category involves techniques that do not use prior knowledge about the structure of the important information to be used in the summary, but instead they produce a semantic representation of the document(s), which is then fed to the NLG system. Different approaches in this category may be the following: • The documents are linguistically processed in order to identify noun phrases, verb phrases that can be linked to the concepts, attributes and relations of a domain-specific ontology. Ontology-based annotations can then be used to select the important document regions (sentences, paragraphs). These regions are then converted into some semantic representation using the results of the linguistic processing and the ontology-based annotations. This representation is then fed to a NLG system that produces the abstract. • The summarization system can identify informational equivalent paragraphs in the input document(s) using clustering techniques. From each theme some representative sentences are extracted, which can be analyzed syntactically and then fed to a sentence generator in order to produce the abstract. Table 2 presents representative systems employing abstractive techniques. Table 2 fields are the same with the fields in Table 1 . There are differences between the two tables concerning the output and the method fields, which are filled with different values. The output field in the abstractive techniques concerns the "semantic representation" used to create the summary (scripts, templates, ontology-based representation, clusters of informational equivalent document regions). The method field is filled with the specific methods used (script activation, information extraction, syntactic processing, NLG, etc.).