Although the summarization community considers evaluation as a critical issue, it still remains unclear what the evaluation criteria should be. This is mainly related to the subjective aspect of summarization, in terms of whether or not a summary is of ''good'' quality. Existing evaluation techniques can be split into two categories, intrinsic and extrinsic ones (see section 5 in  ). An intrinsic method evaluates the outcome of a summarization system independently of the purpose that the summary is supposed to serve. An extrinsic evaluation, on the other hand, evaluates the produced summary in terms of a specific task. An intrinsic method can measure the quality of the summary using criteria such as the integrity of its sentences, the existence of anaphors without their referents (for an extract), the summary readability (for an abstract), the fidelity of the summary compared to the source document(s). Another way to perform an intrinsic evaluation is to have human subjects create a "gold" summary, i.e. an ideal one, which will be compared to the summary created by the system. In this case evaluation can be more quantitative and measure things such as precision or recall. The problem with this approach is that it is usually difficult to make people agree on what constitutes a ''gold'' summary. One way to sidestep this problem is to employ a utilitybased measure, in which a sentence is not assigned a Boolean value (belonging or not to the summary), but instead a value in a scale, according to the opinion of each judge. Those values are then averaged and the top sentences can be considered as forming the ``gold'' summary. In an extrinsic method, the summary is evaluated in relation to the particular task it is supposed to serve. Thus, such an evaluation can greatly vary from system to system. Relevance assessment is an extrinsic method and is usually performed by showing judges a document (summary or source) and a topic and asking them to determine whether that document is relevant to the topic. If, on average, the choices for the source document and the summary are the same, then the summary scores high in the evaluation. Of course, instead of providing a single topic, a list of topics can be provided asking the judges to choose one of them. Another example is the evaluation of reading comprehension. In this case, judges are given a document (either the summary or the source document) and are asked a set of questions. Their answers to these questions determine their comprehension of the text. If the answers to the summary and the corresponding source document(s) are similar, then the summary is positively evaluated.