Based on the cognitive model used in the SimSum system (see sub-section 2.3.5),  63] presented its extension, the SummIt-BMT, which is concerned with the summarization of MEDLINE abstracts and articles for bone marrow transplantation, a specialized field of internal medicine. SummIt-BMT is a query based summarization system. In general, the summarization process is the following: 1. A user forms a search scenario using concepts from the domain ontology. 2. This scenario is mapped to a MEDLINE query. If the outcome of the query points to journal articles, they are included in the results. 3. A text retrieval component identifies the interesting pieces of text in the results. 4. Those pieces are summarized in relation to the query scenario. Links to the original articles are also given. Although SummIt-BMT is based on SimSum it differs from it in several ways. It is not a presentational model anymore but a functional one. Thus, agents simulating lower level cognitive processes have been replaced by functional ones. Text production agents have been removed since SummIt-BMT does not produce smooth text, but organized text clips that are linked to their source positions. As the application field is bone marrow transplantation (BMT), a BMT ontology was set up. Although several medical ontologies existed which are loosely related to the BMT field, a BMT-specific ontology was created due to the fact that the existing ontologies did not contain enough deep BMT knowledge for text knowledge processing. The ontology they created is very important for Summit-BMT, since it is being used in almost all the stages of the summarization process. A scenario interface reflecting everyday situations of BMT physicians BIB7193856 helps users to state their queries. Users fill in ontology concepts, which are for their convenience equipped with definitions and explanations assembled from various sources on the web. From scenario forms and user-selected ontology terms the system obtains structured queries in the predicate-logic form that it can "understand". Queries are given to the search engines, which return a set of documents, abstracts and maybe journal articles, from MEDLINE. The retrieved documents are checked for possible relevance by a text passage retrieval component. Irrelevant documents are discarded. From the final set of documents, the summarization agents take the positive passages from text passage retrieval, represent their phrases and sentences in a predicate logic form, and examine them with human-style criteria: whether they are related to the user query, whether they are redundant, and so on. The agents remove items that do not meet their relevance criteria. The following Table summarizes the main features of the projects/systems presented in section 4.