This paper shows how a question-answering system can be constructed using first-order logic as its language and a resolution-type theorem-prover as its deductive mechanism. A working computer program, qa3, based on these ideas is described. The performance of the program compares favorably with several other general question-answering systems. 1. QUESTION ANSWERING A question-answering system accepts information about some subject areas and answers questions by utilizing this information. The type of question-answering system considered in this paper is ideally one having the following features: 1. A language general enough to describe any reasonable question-answering subjects and express desired questions and answers. 2. The ability to search efficiently the stored information and recognize items that are relevant to a particular query. 3. The ability to derive an answer that is not stored explicitly, but that is derivable by the use of moderate effort from the stored facts. 4. Interactions between subject areas; for example, if the system has facts about Subject a and Subject b, then it should be able to answer a question that requires the use of both sets of facts. 5. Capability of allowing the user to add new facts or replace old facts conveniently. This paper argues the case for formal methods to achieve such a system and presents one particular approach in detail. A natural language facility is not one of the properties sought after or discussed (although Coles, 1968, has added to the program described here a translator from a subset of English to first-order logic). The name ‘question-answering system’ requires clarification. The system described above might be named an ‘advice taker’ or a ‘multi-purpose problem-solving system’ or ‘general problem-solving system’. McCarthy (1958) proposed using formal languages and deduction to construct such a system, and suggested allowing the user to give hints or advice on how to answer a question; he referred to the proposed system as an ‘advice taker’. Research on ‘multi-purpose’ or ‘general problem-solving’ tends to differ from question-answering as described above by placing more emphasis on solving deeper, more difficult problems and less emphasis on user interaction, formality, and efficient retrieval of relevant facts from a large data base. The situation is further confused by the use of ‘question-answering’ to refer sometimes to natural language systems, sometimes to information retrieval systems having little deductive ability, and sometimes to systems with deductive ability limited to the propositional calculus.